<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000e">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">PREFACE</h1>
		<p>How a person who never even dreamt of writing a book got involved in such an exercise is itself a story. The starting point was due to some controversial articles appearing in the media about the Aryan problem. This triggered me to equip myself with enough knowledge on the subject to enable me to join and the fray.</p>
<p>The learing phase was very interesting and instead of restricting myself to understand the views of others on the subject, I was able to think on my own. During the process it occurred to me that it is more important to investigate about the origin and migration of modern humans in general and the Aryans in particular than arguing about some insignificant evidence.</p>
<p>The real breakthrough occurred when I realized that the Sankalpam that I have been chanting for more than 70 years points to the Jumbudvipa connection. I was also aware that the ancient Tamil literature is full of reference to Naval Theevu which means Jambudvipa. According to Tamil legends Jambudvipa was a large island forming part of Kumari Kandam which was to the south of India and extending up to the Antartic pole, with Meru mountain at its centre.</p>
<p>To know more about Jambudvipa, I refered to the Encyclopedia of Hinduism. It states ‘Ancient and medieval Hindu scriptures often refer to India as Bharathavarsha, Bharathakanda, Jambudvipa and so on. Generally the country to the south of the Himalayas and to the north of the Indian Ocean is descibed as Bharathavarsha, practically modern India or undivided India.’ This description is contrary to what is contained in the vast and ancient Tamil Literature.</p>
<p>As both Tamil and Sanskrit sources refer to ‘Meru’, I again went to the Encyclopedia which states “Also called as Sumeru, this mountain is described as the axis of the whole world. It is golden in colour and is very bright. Its total height is one lakh yoganas. It is situated in the centre of Jambudvipa and Bharathavarsha is to its south.”</p>
<p>“The Kedarnath mountain (in Garhwal district of Uttaranchal) is traditionally believed to be the original Meru.”</p>
<p>First there is a contradiction in the description itself. If Meru is the axis of the whole world it has to be one of the two poles and how could it be located in India. Fortunately the Encyclopedia states that Meru is a tall mountain that emits bright light. This detail is in comfirmity with scientific observations at the two poles and helps us to clear the confusion.</p>
<p>The scientific fact is that aurora is a natural light display in the Arctic and Antartic regions. It is caused by the collision of energetic charged particles with atoms in high altitude atmosphere. In the Northern latitudes the effect is known as aurora borealis (northern lights). The southern counterpart is aurora australis (southern lights) which has the same features as its northern counterpart. Aurora australis is visible from high southern latitudes in Antartica, South America, New Zealand and Australia.</p>
<p>As Jambudvipa is described as a large island it can only be the Antartic pole where a huge island exists. Combining the valuable inputs from Hindu scriptures, Tamil legends and modern scientific observations, we can conclude that Meru is nothing but aurora australis. Obviously our ancients were aware of the huge pillar of light, seeing it from a distance. They naturally attributed divinity to the spectacle and thought it was the abode of God.</p>
<p>The exercise described above instilled a lot of confidence in me and propelled me forward to investigate the origin and migration of modern humans. It also showed me that my approach should be multilingual and multidisciplinary with due weightage for living history.</p>
<p>At this stage I realized that investigation of the origin and migration of modern humans is the work of major organizations and international bodies involving billions of dollars and how could a lone individual with no budget provision attempt such an exercise. The thought was a disturbing one till I remembered a caricature which I had kept on my table when I was a designer in Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. The caricature portrayed a flying bumblebee and two room mates who were doing research in aerodynamics. One was sad and squatting on the ground and the other standing and laughing. When querried by his friend the distraught one replied, “I have done a thorough research on the flying characteristics of a bumblebee and under no circumstance it can fly. To my amazement it flies”. The happy friend replied, “This should not bother you because the bumblebee does not understand aerodynamic equation and ignorantly flies”. I realized that I am in similar situation like the bumblebee and have undertaken a task that is not meant for a simple individual. Subsequently I realized that I have not used population genetics as the primary tool for arriving at many of my conclusions. This is what Dr. Kumarasamy Thangaraj of CCMB advised when he said, “Models of population genetics should be treated with caution although they provide an important framework for testing historical hypothesis”. I have fully followed his advice in that I have evolved a historical hypothesis based on other branches of knowledge and used data related to population genetics for testing the hypothesis.</p>
<p>After writing the book I was searching for words to describe my work which was not easy. Fortunately my daughter drew my attention to a quotation by Mark Twain in the Hindu Metro Plus dated 15th August, 2012, which read, “India is the cradle of human race, the mother of history, the grandmother of legend and the great grandmother of tradition”. I was truly humbled when I realized that I could not have described my book in a better manner. Also I was amazed at the metamorphisis of a simple idea of taking part in the Aryan imbroglio, into the search for the Aryans and their migration and finally ending up in an endeavour to prove what Mark Twain had said. Surely it was possible only because of Divine guidance and help that I have had throughout the exercise.</p>
<p class="text-right"><em>– A.R. Vasudevan</em></p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
