<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-101">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">A YOUNGSTER’S WOES</h1>
		<p>For a person who is neither connected with history nor with any of the associated disciplines, it is a daunting task to attempt to write the history of ‘modern humans’ spanning a period of about 2,00,000 years. Naturally, it is quite a difficult exercise to figure out from where to start the story. After a lot of thinking, I decided that the best way to start the story would be to start it with something which I know first hand and probably experienced the same. So the choice of the starting point narrowed down to the famous or infamous Aryan Invasion Theory or A.I.T. The sum and substance of the theory is that around 1500 B.C., some white-coloured and blue-eyed nomads on horses presumed to be Aryans came through the Khyber Pass and vanquished the Dravidians living in the Indus Valley and drove them out towards the southern parts of India. The A.I.T was an outcome of the archeological findings in Harappa and Mohanjadaro during the 1920’s and based on the linguistic theory of the 19th century. </p>
		 <p>At that time, I was a youngster and India was ruled by the British. For running their administration they had employed a large number of Brahmins, who had the basic requisite qualifications. Naturally a large number of Brahmins went up the ladder and occupied high positions in Government. Probably many of the Diwans of the princely states like Travancore, Mysore, etc. were Brahmins. One can easily see from the writings of popular leaders that this fact probably irked the well-to-do non-Brahmins of South India and they started a movement to root out the dominance of the Brahmins. The ideal fuel for such a movement was the A.I.T. Brahmins were branded as Aryans and aliens who had usurped the opportunities of non-Brahmins who were supposed to be Dravidians. This is how the Aryan-Dravidian divide originated in the composite Madras State of that time. During the early days, the Justice Party was promoted by zamindars and the rich non-Brahmins as a non-Brahmin movement. Later the mantle fell on the shoulders of Periyar E.V.R. who stressed the rights of Dravidians and named his party as Dravida Kazhagam.</p>
		 <p>My formative years were the 1930’s and 1940’s during which time the movement was virulent. I remember that there was one Panneerselvam who was going abroad to attend some international conference. Before his departure, he thundered in one meeting, that soon after his return, he would see to it that the Brahmin women went to non-Brahmin houses to serve as menial servants. As a child, I used to think that this was all real and felt that I had to unfortunately accept the fact of being the child of a would-be menial servant. Later I learnt that he boarded a plane which vanished without any trace. When I was a teenager, I had my high school education in Kumbakonam which seemed to be the epicenter of the nonBrahmin movement. Walls used to be plastered with all sorts of slogans exhorting the Aryans (Brahmins) to get out of Tamil Nadu. In Gandhi Park, which was near my school and home, regular meetings were held to condemn the atrocities committed by Brahmins and about how the Dravidians proposed to punish them. The lectures used to be threatening in nature as the Dravidian parties had evolved a sort of rhetoric to censure the Brahmins. </p>
		 <p>The anti-Brahmin movement did not stop with rhetoric alone. I had heard of the threads of Brahmin priests being cut. The worst happened near my home when a set of hooligans licked the religious marks of Brahmins in a busy street. Later this movement also became anti-Hindu, anti-Sanskrit, anti-Hindi and anti-religious. They used to conduct marriages only during Rahu-Kaalam and they showed great disrespect to Hindu Gods to provoke the religious-minded public. I am narrating these incidents just to show how it affected a growing youngster and am not taking side with the Brahmin cause. I used to think that there was nothing of worth that could be done by Brahmins and that they should be content with an inferior status in society. Therefore, I was keen to see the prospective speakers before the meetings started to know more about them. Once I saw the great E.V.R talking very pleasantly to people. Even though he knew a Brahmin boy had intruded into his camp he was not perturbed and looked at me approvingly. His behaviour made me think he was basically a good person. When I was with him, one of the party workers went out with a thermos flask to fetch coffee. E.V.R. called him back and told him “Don’t get coffee from shops run by our boys -- get it from a Brahmin shop. He only knows how to make coffee”. This comment from the person, who would shortly exhibit his choice anti-Brahmin rhetoric, was really comforting to me because of the thought that if I could do nothing else, I could at least supply coffee to the Dravidians. I thought he was a good person because in spite of his forthcoming anti-Brahmin remarks during the evening meeting, he probably enjoyed a cup of coffee brought from a Brahmin hotel (even today restaurants in Tamil Nadu are known as ‘Hotels’). This was a period when I was a teenager studying in that marvellous institution known as Town High School. The feeling that E.V.R. was not that antagonistic gave me some solace till I went to college. </p>
		 <p>After completing high school education, I was happy to join the local college where my name appeared in the first list of admissions. The setting of the college on the banks of the sacred Cauvery was simply superb. The building which housed the college was built by the Tanjore Royalty as their summer retreat. While sitting in some of the class rooms of the college, one can watch the quiet river flowing. As the college was situated on the other side of the river, the students had to cross the river in a boat to reach the college. The boatman was a well built tall, black person known as Ammavaasai (if I remember right). </p>
		 <p>As per my habit, one day I reached the boat jetty quite early before anyone had arrived. I was happy to get into the boat and occupy a comfortable seat. No other passenger arrived for quite some time and Ammavaasai started moving the boat. As the boat began moving, I started recollecting the details of the provocative speeches made at Gandhi Park twelve hours earlier. It slowly dawned on me that I was in a difficult situation. Surely, Ammavaasai would have listened to the lectures at the Park and probably wanted to do his bit for the Dravidian cause. Here was a giant Dravidian with an Aryan pigmy as the sole passenger in his boat. My fear was that he could easily throw me into the middle of the river to further the cause of the Dravidians if he had listened to the fiery speeches. As the boat started moving towards the middle of the river, I had no option but to close my eyes out of fear. The situation continued till Ammavaasai nudged me. When I opened my eyes, Ammavaasai sported a big grin and it was unnerving to see the big white teeth against a perfect black background. The situation improved when I looked around and realized that the boat had reached the other side of the river. I heaved a sigh of relief when I put my foot on the steps of the jetty helped by Ammavaasai. Later I established a great rapport with him when he confided that he never attended the Gandhi Park lecturers as it was sheer waste of time to attend such lectures. Like a good Samaritan, he was always ready to help anyone. The luxury of a boat ride ended within a year of joining the college when a Sourashtra Brahmin known as Aramanai Rama Iyer donated money to build a foot bridge across the river. </p>
		 <p>The mental agitation of a teenager during his formative years leads us to the story of this book, in which he has tried to find out whether Aryans and Dravidians ever existed and if so, where did they evolve and how did they migrate to populate the world.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
