<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-103">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">NAGAS</h1>
		<p>Almost seventy years ago, the then prevailing anti-Brahmin movement in Tamil Nadu was a subject of discussion between two teenagers. They were students in the local college and they used to listen to the leaders of the party whose main target were the Brahmins. The rhetoric of these leaders was so fearsome that it convinced the two youngsters that there was no future for them in Tamil Nadu which was known as Madras Province at that time. One of the youngsters was V. Vaidyanathan who used to read a lot and had strong views on the subject of the anti-Brahmin movement in Madras Province, unlike the author of this book. During the discussion, Vaidyanathan stated that Buddha was the first anti-Brahmin, the second was Saint Ramanuja and third was Periyar E.V. Ramaswamy Naicker. This lead to a quarrel between the two when one of them took it as an insult to the great Ramanuja.</p>
 <p>I have always been a staunch follower and admirer of the great Vaishnavite Saint Ramanuja and the quarrel that happened 70 years ago is still not forgotten. Teenager feelings apart, the statement of Vaidyanathan is still ringing in my ears. However, now I do not see any substance in the objections I raised as a teenager. Having been exposed to the history of Lord Buddha and Saint Ramanuja, I see some truth in the statement of my friend. Lord Buddha tried his best to find solace in the religion practiced at his time, got disillusioned and developed ideas which were different to the Brahmin religion. Even though Saint Ramanuja had great faith in the Vedas, Brahmasutras etc. and was one of the great exponents of ancient literature, his view about society was not a conservative one. He wanted to break the barrier between the Brahmins and others, and had many close disciples who were not Brahmins. This he did inspite of the strong resentment of Brahmins. Now coming to the great leader EVR, I have seen him at close quarters and have seen how he dealt with various matters. This has always made me think that at a personal level he was quite accommodative. Probably because of his failure to make a mark in religion or the congress party where he was an office bearer, he was forced like Buddha, to follow a different path and he chose to improve the lot of non-Brahmins by abusing Brahmins who were a mere 3% of the population. Now, coming back to the quarrel between the two youngsters, the truth is that it cannot be denied that the three great leaders wanted to change the attitude of Brahmins towards others. This fact prompted me to dig into the matter further and find out any common factor among these three great personalities of India.</p>
 <p>According to historians, Buddha descended from Kapila who belonged to the Naga clan. Buddha belonged to the royal family which was located in Nepal area populated by people with Mongolian features who were the original Nagas. Therefore, it has to be concluded that Buddha was a Naga. This fact is confirmed if we refer to details about Nagas contained in Tamil literature. One of the Tamil poets describes the quarrel between two kings in Ceylon, the Naga country. The quarrel was about an item of religious significance and it had to be finally settled by Lord Buddha himself. He travelled, to the Naga country and settled the issue. Further, it may be worth noting that any history book on Ceylon starts with information about the Nagas and it seems that around 600 B.C. powerful Naga kingdoms existed on the West Coast of Ceylon. Buddha, probably, had close links with those kingdoms.</p>
 <p>Now, coming back to Saint Ramanuja, he was pictured as an incarnation of Adi Sesha, a snake. There is an interesting story about how he settled a dispute pertaining to the famous Balaji Temple at Tirupati. His opponents complained that being a snake he could have slithered into the sanctum sanctorum to meddle with the evidence. Further, he was named after the younger brother of Lord Rama. Ramanuja means younger brother of Rama i.e. Lakshmana, Lakshmana is supposed to be an incarnation of Adisesha the great serpent. Thus, the snake connection or the Naga connection gets established and it will only be reasonable to assume that Ramanuja was a naga or in other words, that he had the Naga genes.</p>
 <p>According to Fergusson, Nayars of Kerala and Nevars of Nepal have many similarities. This probably establishes a Buddhist connection. Further, some communities in Kerala tie their tuft in front of their head imitating the hood of a snake. I feel that the Iyengars of South India seem to have a Naga connection. A community with similar religious beliefs is a group of Naidus. Just like the coastal town of Nagapatinam that has a Naga flavour, I suggest that the Nayars, Naiks and Naikars, in particular, have some Naga connection. Periyar E.V.R. was a Naiker and was probably a Naga. From Rajaji’s writings, I understand that E.V.R’s mother used to sport a big ‘namam’ which I consider to be a Naga symbol. Now coming back to the main subject of anti-Brahminism, I want to suggest that it is probably an age old animosity between Nagas and Devas which manifested in different ways in the three great Indians, i.e. Lord Buddha, Saint Ramanuja and Periyar E.V. Ramaswamy Naikar.</p>
 <p>Even with my limited readings, I find that Tamil authors have a lot to say about the Nagas. Sangarapillai makes an emphatic statement that Nagas were the original inhabitants of Lemuria; later they lived in India and in the adjoining countries to the East of India. Mandothari, the wife of Ravana was a Naga woman. Sangarapillai also states that Tamils and Nagas belong to the the same race. Tamil authors like Appadurai and Aravanan give interesting details about the Nagas. They have gleaned the information mainly from Tamil literature such as Silappathikaran, Manimegalai, et., From ancient literature and their commentators, we understand that Nagas were seafarers, traders and engineers, and well versed in fine arts. They were fearless warriors and of vengeful nature.</p>
 <p>There is a well known story about Chola king who fell in love with a Naga maiden and lived with her for some time. Later, she leaves him and he was not able to see her again. However, she sent their son to meet the Chola king. The name of the Chola king is Villivalavan and the story is described in detail in Manimegalai. Ancient Sanskrit literature like Mahabaratha also gives credence to such stories. In the Mahabaratha, Arjuna married two Naga beauties, Ulipi and then Chitrangi, the daughter of Chitravahana, a Naga king. It is also recorded that Arjun’s grandson Parakshit was killed by a Naga King Daksha. Therefore, Parakshit’s son, Janamejaya, waged war against the Nagas and killed thousands of them.</p>
 <p>In ancient sculptures (before 1800 B.C.) retrieved from Amaravathi, we can see human figures with extended hoods behind their heads. Some of those pieces are kept in Madras Museum and it is confirmed that the sculptures represent the Nagas. The heads inside the hood are three, five or seven in number, the larger number signifying higher status. Here, also the usual confusion is evident as the sculptures have human bodies above and snake tails below. The writings of those times also mention that the Nagas lived in the underworld like snakes. We should not take this literally and understand that the Naga tribes lived a long time ago in India and the adjoining areas.</p>
 <p>In particular, the Nagas were excellent weavers. They lived on the East coast of Pandya country and their muslin was exported to many countries, particularly Rome. Kalinga Nagas were good at weaving and therefore, a word for woven cloth was Kalingam. They were adept in weaving the thinnest of muslin. Probably these are skills that later went to Bengal Probably they produced the best muslin and the British are reported to have amputated the thumbs of weavers to avoid any competition from them against the machine-made textiles produced in Britain.</p>
 <p>The time period covered above was the interval between 500 B.C. and 8000 B.C. as it refers to sculptures dating to 1800 B.C., Mahabharata (3100 B.C.) and Ramayana (4000 B.C). The next time period is earlier than 8000 B.C., probably extending to about 20,000 B.C., the time of the Puranas and the early Deva Asura wars. In the Puranas the three lokas are described and Narada was called Triloka Sanchari as he traversed through all the three lokas namely Devaloka, Bhooloka and Nagaloka. What is of importance to us is the mention of Nagaloka which clearly indicates that other than the Devas and humans, Nagas also lived giving credence to the idea that the Nagas were a separate entity. There are instances where Sage Narada admires the grandeur of the Naga cities.</p>
 <p>Earlier than 20,000 years, we can only mention the living fossils in Nicobar islands. The Stone age tribe living in Nicobar is known as Shompen and they have Mongolian features. If they had got isolated from the Kumari people 60,000 years ago, we can conclude that Nagas with Mongolian features were living before the past 60,000 years. Having established that the Nagas were a distinct ethnic group among the Kumari people we should also find out who they were. As the Nagas are reported to have more pleasing physical features and exhibited a hybrid behavioral vigor, we can postulate that they were a cross breed between the two distinct ancestral groups of Kumari.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
