<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-104">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">TRADITIONAL BELIEFS</h1>
		<p>Ancient populations had a sense of connection to their original home and because of poor geographical knowledge, they could never pin-point the place of their origin but could only give some particulars about the place. For instance, the Persians believed that the first sacred land, the seed region from which the Persians came, as a region of snow and cold. Similarly, the Egyptians believed that they came from the East, and the Australian aborigines felt a connection with Africa.</p>
 <p>Till recently, such traditional beliefs were totally ignored and ridiculed due to the tyranny of science and misplaced sense of secular ideas. Fortunately, such attitudes are now changing and a sort of humble approach to such problems is beginning to be established.</p>
 <p>From ‘The Hindu’ dated 05/12/2005, some years ago, on the banks of Siletz Bay in Lincoln city, Oregon, a memorial was dedicated to one of America’s worst calamity, a huge earthquake and tsunami that killed thousands of Native Americans. This also served as a warning to locals that a similar devastation could strike at any time. This has also given birth to a new discipline that combines Earth Science studies with an analysis of ancient legends. The new discipline is known as geo-mythology. In a different context, it has been established by geologists that the flooding myths, such as that of Noah’s Ark could be traced to the sudden increase in Black Sea level 7,600 years ago. So much so, it is now realized that myths can tell us about what happened in the past and warn us of future disasters. All of us know that the devastating tsunami in Dec. 2004 killed around 300,000 people. The sea gypsies of Thailand, known as Moken, have a tradition which warns that when tides recede far and fast, man-eating waves will soon appear and people should run far and fast. The Mokens did it and survived. Similarly, tales in Fiji were found to be true regarding an eruption of a volcano that had died long ago.</p>
 <p>Recently, I was pleasantly surprised to know that the British Royal Society has proposed that creation be taught in science classes in schools. This has alarmed the scientific community. Further, University of Oxford researchers will spend nearly 2 Million Pounds on a three year programme to determine why mankind embraces God.</p>
 <p>A question was posed by the website www.edge.org which drew response from more than 120 of the world’s greatest thinkers. The thinkers were scientists and philosophers, and the subjects were based on evolution. The respondents confessed of a change of heart and it was a case of display of scientific modesty. I feel that such a change of heart augurs well for the future of science and history. It will lead to a balanced human thinking which is bereft of the arrogance of the Victorian Era.</p>
 <p>If we are going to accept all these traditional beliefs that maintain a sense of connection to the original homeland of Persians, Egyptians and Australians aborigines, the birth of a new discipline in the United States known as geo-mythology, that the sea gypsies of Thailand (known as Moken) could save themselves from the devastating tsunami of Dec. 2004 because of their belief in tradition and the fact that the venerable British Royal Society could make a U-turn away from the path of hard core scientists, it is high time we look at the legends of India which are the oldest and probably the original ones.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
