<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-106">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">ANCIENT CHRONICLES</h1>
		<p>The main purpose of this book is to understand the history of evolution of modern humans, particularly the Aryans, covering many tens of thousands of years. We have seen that isolated evidence, even scientific, are not enough to reconstruct past history going back to beyond 5000 years from the present. Main reasons are that evidences such as archeological ones are scanty and any new finding may alter the situation drastically. As far as genetics is concerned, the data available for many parts of the world are meagre and we are now seeing that old conclusions are being challenged by new data. Unfortunately, past prejudices are also playing their part to create confusion. Therefore, a multi-disciplinary approach is a must and we should not avoid the very rich sources such as Puranas, Tamil literature etc.</p>
		<p>The problems with ancient chronicles are that they do not seem to be reliable for a casual reader. We should appreciate the fact that the chronicles such as the Puranas are records derived from collective memory. Till they were reduced to writing, they were orally transmitted from generation to generation. As we shall see later, oral transmission is not fool proof and even in a short span of time, distortions can easily occur. The second difficulty is that cultural scenarios over periods of time alter the way of expressing things and this may cause errors in records covering long periods of time. The third difficulty is what is known as poetic license where authors introduce exaggerated elements to make the story interesting. Another cause for errors in transmission happens to be the translation errors which would have been common in the olden days.</p>
		<p>First, I would like to show how oral transmission of information can get distorted. Here I shall give two examples, one which I have experienced and another which I have heard from my teachers. Even though the village where I grew up was on a highway in Tamil Nadu, many new products had not reached it during the 1930s. One Mr. Mani Iyer of our village had to go to the city of Madras to attend a marriage and he stayed there for a couple of weeks. During his stay in Madras he we exposed to the advantages of the bicycle which he had seen earlier only from a distance. He learnt to ride a bike and bought a few bicycles and boldly decided to open a cycle hiring shop in our village. This changed the transport style in the village which the management people today call a ‘paradigm shift’. I was one of the beneficiaries as the cycle in Mani Iyer’s shop could be hired at the rate of one Anna (1/16 of a rupee) per hour. I learnt cycling and all my pocket money was spent on hiring cycles. Thus, there was a cycling frenzy in the village and a dozen hiring outlets sprouted.</p>
		<p>Mani Iyer, the bike pioneer of the village, had also acquired information as to how to always maintain the cycle in good condition. He came back to village after his second visit to Madras and announced that the machine could be kept in good condition only if ‘over oiled’ periodically. All the cyclophiles in the village pondered over the subject and decided that they would do a better job than the city dwellers by ‘over oiling’ the cycle more often. Thus the ‘over oiling’ frenzy started and they used to pour pure coconut oil on the rotating portions of the machine to keep it in good health. Needless to say, I was one of the early devotees of this ‘over oiling’ cult. Whenever I hired a bike to travel a distance of 6 or 7 miles, I used to take it home and beg my mother to spare some coconut oil. I would pour it on the free wheel and the oil would be wasted. Our neighbor, Mr. Narayanaswami Iyer, a devout Hindu, used to see this ‘over oiling’ ritual and reminded the youngsters about how our ancients were so wise that they devised the idea of abishekams to Hindu deities which he thought was a kind of ‘over-oiling’. I also did some original thinking on the subject and realized why my mother used to insist that the youngsters must have two oil baths in a week, boys on Saturdays and Wednesdays and girls on Fridays and Tuesdays. As she used to tell us that it is the oil bath that would keep us healthy, I could easily understand the value of ‘over-oiling’ and hence I became a staunch devotee of this new cult.</p>
		<p>Things went on happily for six months when an engineering team arrived in the village to drill a borewell for drinking water. The supervisor of the team came in the bike and impressed us as the most knowledgeable person on Earth about the affairs of a bike. One day, he saw me ‘over oiling’ the bike and laughed at the exercise being carried out. I explained to him that Mani Mama of the village had learnt from an expert in Madras about ‘over oiling’. Then he took trouble to convince us that Mani mama had misunderstood ‘over hauling’ as ‘over oiling’. The engineer did not know how to overhaul a cycle but vaguely hinted that it pertains to replacement of worn out parts and also greasing the rotating parts. Thus ended the story of over oiling, a miscarriage of information by the pioneer cyclist of the village. If such a simple information could get distorted in a single transmission, what about the information contained in old chronicles which were transmitted over thousands of generations?</p>
		<p>The second story is about the name of a bridge in Madras. I have heard the story from my teachers at the Town High School. It seems that during the British days in India, a bridge was built in Madras and it was named after an Englishman called Hamilton. As time passed, they called the bridge Ambattan bridge. The word ‘ambattan’ means barber in Tamil. Later, there was a time in Madras Presidency when they anglicized all Tamil names for the convenience of the British rulers. Quite naturally, Ambattan bridge was translated as ‘Barbers Bridge’.</p>
		<p>The way in which an event is described goes on changing from one society to another and also from time to time depending upon the cultural level of the society at the time the event is discussed.</p>
		<p>To demonstrate this, I would like to give the example of a Chinese writing describing a chemical experiment (from Lost Discoveries by Dick Teresi). The earliest Alchemic text is by Wei Po-Yang Tsand is a T’ung written around AD 140. The work probably describes an experiment of cinnabar-mercurysulphur reactions. The chemicals going into the fire are called by metaphorical names - White Tiger (probably mercury), Blue Dragon and Gray Dragon (sulphur). Further descriptions go on as follows:</p>
		<p>“On the sides (of the apparatus) there are the walled enclosures, shaped little peng-hu pot. Closed on all the sides of the interior are made of intercommunication labyrinths. The Protection is so complete as to turn back all that is devilish or undesirable. Like the moon lying in the back is the shape of the furnace and the pot. In it, is heated the White Tiger, Mercury Sun is the following pearl and with out the Blue Dragon. The east and the west merge together and the hun and po (two kinds of souls) control one another. The Red Bird is the spirit of fire and dispenses a victory or defeat with justice. With the ascending of water comes the vanquishing of fire.</p>
		<p>It is clear that they were explaining things as it was understood by others at that time. It may be funny, confusing or even simple nonsense if we apply our present day standards and judge those statements. At the time when it was written it would have been quite acceptable and probably a very great way of explaining a particular experiment.</p>
		<p>Lastly, I would like to discuss the poetic license allowed to authors to make their writing interesting, by citing an example from the Ramayana. The story of Ramayana is well known in India and even the non-believers and people belonging to other religions know its broad details. The great monkey God, Hanuman (Anjaneya), was one of the key figures in this Ithihasa. He was very strong, very intelligent and capable of accomplishing any task assigned to him. He was able to cross the seas with ease, trace Mother Sita devi, fight with mighty Ravana and his retinue as an individual, and even save the life of Lord Rama and his brother during the battle that took place leter. Therefore, from early childhood I have been wondering about the identities of Lord Anjaneya. If he had been a half monkey and half man, the time period when he lived becomes millions of years ago. Now, it is fairly clear that the modern human evolved about 200,000 years ago. Therefore, if Hanuman had been a monkey, we come to an absurd conclusion that Rama happened to live before the modern human evolution around 200,000 years ago.</p>
		<p>There have been a few attempts to solve this anomaly. The best answer comes from Sangarapillai who says that there were many groups among Dravidians such the Paravar, their flag had a bird symbol, and the Vanavar with a monkey as their symbol etc., Vali, Sugriva and Hanuman belonged to this group of Vanavar and they were fully civilized modern human beings. Probably, Valmiki, a Dravidian who wrote Ramayana, wanted to make the story a very interesting one and pictured the Vanavar as half monkey - half human. In modern times, we have Batman, Spiderman and Superman. etc. to make stories interesting.</p>
		<p>One of the accepted methods to establish the time when some event happened is no doubt archeological dating. In the same manner, astronomical dating could be a very useful tool provided astronomical references are available as to when a particular event happened. Fortunately, such references are available in the Ramayana and the Mahabharata. However, there has been some difficulty with regard to astronomical dating. As the calculations are quite complicated, the manual computations involved are fraught with possible errors. However, this constraint vanishes if we take to computer calculations which can be made very accurately. That is what has been done by Pushkar Bhatnagar in the dating of Lord Rama. He has published a book “Dating the Era of Lord Rama” and in that he has arrived at the date of birth of Lord Rama as 10th January, 5114 BC. Similar studies have also been carried out by others. Even though there is no total agreement on the exact date, there is general agreement that the period of Ramayana existed about 7000 years from now. If we turn to the Puranic and Ithihasa references, Saraswathi Valley Civilization was not unknown to personages during Lord Rams’s time. Therefore, the date of Ramayana should definitely be less than 10,000 years from now and not in lakhs of years as some people believe.</p>
		<p>There is another reason for the confusion. There is connection between India and Sri Lanka known as Adam’s bridge. The faithful call it Rama Sethu and others say it is a geological feature which is 1.7 lakh years old. Satellite pictures have established that certain features of the bridge point to man’s efforts. In my opinion the controversy could be settled if we believe that Rama’s army built a bridge taking advantage of a natural feature which any engineer would do. Here again Bhatnagar has studied the rise of the sea level and has concluded that the present depth of the remnants of the bridge coincides with the rise that have occurred during the last 7000 years. In conclusion, we can say the time of Rama could be worked out through astronomical dating method which is certainly a scientific process even though there may be errors which are comparable in magnitude to carbon dating, fluorescent dating etc.</p>
		<p>The example cited above is quite interesting and it clearly demonstrates the kind of anachronism that can crop up in ancient writings due to the enthusiasm of the authors to say something very interesting. Thanks to genetics, we know that humans and apes branched off around five million year ago. Further, it has been fairly well established that settled life and kingdoms could not have existed before the Neolithic revolution. Therefore, details in Ramayana are applicable to a time period less than 10,000 years from now. Fortunately, in this particular case, Sangarapillai gives the details of various clans using different types of flags, he has identified Hanuman as one belonging to Vanavars and whose flag had a monkey as their symbol. Astronomical dating of Rama’s birth also helps in establishing a time line for ancient happenings.</p>
		<p>To sum up, we can say that the Puranas, Ithihasas and ancient Tamil literature may not give history on a platter and we have to dig into it like an archeologist for long periods to bring out the possible truth. The effort would not be more difficult than say the digging at Mehrgarh which took more than 10 years. Nor would it be more costly than genetic research which has consumed billions of dollars. As Sangarapillai says, we have to sieve the Puranic information to get the truth. Rather we should have proper filters to process such information contained in ancient chronicles.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
