<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-107">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">GENETICS</h1>
		<p>As the readers may not be aware of the various terms used in Genetics, I would like to briefly define some of the important terms as this is necessary to understand the subject when we start explaining it through the language of genetics.</p>
 <p>DNA is an abbreviation for deoxyribonucleic acid and it is this molecule that encodes genetic information. DNA is a very long filament made of a chain combining four different nucleotides - adenine (A), guanine (G), cytosine (C) and thymine (T). It is a double stranded molecule (in the form of double helix) and the two strands are held together by weak bonds between base pairs of nucleotides. The relative order of these base pairs, whether in a fragment of DNA or gene or the entire genome, is referred to as a DNA sequence. The base pairs form only between A and T, and between G and C. Therefore the base sequence of each single strand can be deduced from that of the partner.</p>
 <p>‘Gene’ can be defined as a segment of DNA or sequence of DNA in the genome. It is the fundamental physical and functional unit of heredity and it is located in a particular position on a particular chromosome that encodes a specific functional product. The human genome is the total collection of genes in a human being. There are three billion base pairs in a human genome. It will be surprising to know that there are only about 25,000 genes which are the basic physical and functional units of heredity. According to one author, genes are like occasional oasis in a huge desert of junk instructions. What is important to note is that the genome from which life springs consists of a lot of junk instructions when compared with its useful parts, viz. the genes.</p>
 <p>Gene mapping is the determination of the relative positions of genes on a DNA molecule, and also the distance between them. In order to do this, one has to map the three billion building blocks which is a mind boggling exercise and fifty years ago, many scientists thought this was an impossible task. However, after a lot of bickering, “the International Genome Project” was finally launched and the book of life was read in 2001, fifteen years after the launch of the project and 50 years after the discovery of double helix.</p>
 <p>Mitochondrion DNA (mt DNA) is what is passed from mother to her daughters. Initially, genetic scientists did most of their work with mt-DNA which is helpful in establishing maternal ancestry. But most of the latter work in genetics concentrated on the Y chromosome (male line) polymorphisms. Talking of chromosomes, there are 46 chromosomes in the human genome which consists of 22 pairs of autosomes and one pair of sex chromosomes that are X and Y chromosomes. The 22 pairs of autosomes are not involved in sex determination whereas X is the female chromosome and Y is the male.</p>
 <p>The dictionary meaning of mutation is the “process of an instance of change or alteration”. We know that DNA is a very long chain-like filament made up of four nucleotides, viz., A,C, G and T. In the DNA of the parent, there will be a defined sequence of the four elements along the chain. We can call the DNA sequence in the off-springs as a copy of the parent DNA. In the copying process, random errors crop up which is we can call ‘copying’ mistakes. Such errors in the sequence of DNA will be in the form of one nucleotide being replaced by another. Thus, if a DNA segment is GCAATGCCC in the parent it may become GCAACGGCCC, T being replaced by C in the fifth place of the sequence. This is the smallest change that can happen to DNA and is called a mutation in the DNA. The mutation described above is caused by the copying mistake. There could be mutations due to other causes also such as selection or drift. Such changes in DNA may cause change in protein and this may cause a change visible to the naked eye. If the parent had a particular mutation, it will be passed on to future generations. In most cases, DNA changes have no effect but occasionally it may cause a harm or beneficial change.</p>
 <p>DNA marker is defined as a gene or other fragment of DNA whose location in the genome is known. Whenever a change occurs in the DNA sequence of the Y-chromosome, that change becomes a signpost for the location of the marker. Such markers are known as Y- chromosome markers or simply Ymarkers. The beauty of this marker is that it is passed on through the male line only i.e. father to son etc. Let us now take a person with Y-chromosome marker M-20 who lives in South India. This means that there was a change at a particular position in the nucleotide sequence of his Y chromosomes. The first man who had M-20 could be called M-20 i.e. named after the marker. All of his sons will also have this marker which will be passed on to their sons. This has been going on in South India as the first M-20 created a large population of M-20 people today. Therefore, today a South Indian with M-20 can trace his ancestry to the single ancestor who was born 25,000 years ago with the mutation and who in turn can claim to be a descendant of the M-9 clan which is ancestral to M-20. The dictionary meaning of mutation is the process of an instance of change or alteration. Therefore, a particular mutation at a particular place has been identified as Y marker M-20. Many such mutations have been identified referred to by the markers such as M-130, M-17 etc.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
