<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-204">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">CASTE SYSTEM</h1>
		<p>Having established the correlation between Samudra Mathana and the Neolithic Revolution, let us now discuss as to how the knowledge gained during the revolution was sustained and improved upon during the last 10,000 years. During our living memory, the best examples of such a revolution were the ‘Green Revolution’ and the “White revolution”. The former was a global effort whereas the latter was an Indian effort. We are all aware of the monumental efforts of Government, Universities, other educational institutions, field demonstration units etc. to enable the farmer to increase the yields. Also major training institutes were custodians of the new knowledge, and the training of recruits on the new technology was a smooth affair. However, in the case of Neolithic Revolution the situation was entirely different in that the hunter - gatherer society consisted of tribal units with very low communication level and practically no training from educational institutions. Therefore, it was necessary to device a suitable system for training and sustain the knowledge gained. Our ancients were able to find a suitable answer and the practice of passing on the knowledge from father to son, as in the case of genes, was evolved. In this system, the younger generation in a family works as apprentices with the older generation and become familiar with what the seniors have been doing. Thus was born the system where each family specialized in a particular profession and the family continued to do the same thing generation after generation. As it was all a family affair, the learning process was quite an easy process and the younger generation got trained in the family profession without the help of training institutes that we have today.</p>
 <p>Credit should go to our ancients who devised the system because it has worked extremely well for almost 10,000 years and achieved what they wanted to as can be judged from the fantastic economic development of modern humans. Naturally, the professional groups got established as castes that we see today - Kumbar (potter), Sonar (goldsmith), Lohar (blacksmith), Mallah (fisherman) etc. as seen in North India. Such divisions not only covered manufacturing activity but also covered services such as Dhobie (washerman), Durgi (tailor), Kahar (water carrier) etc. Such caste divisions were not peculiar to India alone and later civilizations, as in England, have surnames such as Taylor, Baker, Carpenter, Goldsmith etc. which probably indicate the professions followed by their families in the past. Even though there was full justification for such divisions (which became castes) in the olden days, the caste system has become an anachronism in modern times.</p>
 <p>What I have seen in my village during the 30’s and 40’s of the last century is evidence enough to confirm my ideas on the caste system. There was one gentleman by name Subramaniyan whom we used to call Vaidyar (doctor). Actually he belonged to the caste of barbers and along with other families of barbers he used to live in a separate area. The Vaidyar was also one of the richest persons in the village. At the time Allopathy had not made inroads into villages like ours and all medical support was given by Vaidyars who were also barbers by caste. If anyone in our family was ill, he used to visit the patient promptly and attend to the case. On the top of his medicine chest there was always a very thin silk scarf to wrap round our wrists while studying the pulse. He used to ask searching questions and when he finally made up his mind, he used to mix a number of coloured powders and ask us to take them at specified intervals by mixing the powder with honey. At times, he used to enforce food discipline e.g. ‘no salt’ etc. I do remember that he used to do minor operations as well. Therefore, we were all under his medical care for decades and we were satisfied with his services. I should also add that he was not a literate and that is the reason why he used to see my father frequently to sort out legal problems of ownership disputes, tax payments etc.,</p>
 <p>The above experience of mine brings out certain facts clearly. For generations Subramaniyan’s ancestors were barbers. Also, some of them seem to have taken to medical practice which seems to have been the practice in their families where the father or uncle was always the teacher - which was the very foundation of the caste system. It was evident that the medical knowledge was transmitted orally as he used to recite some verses which enabled him to decide on the treatment.</p>
 <p>I would also like to narrate another instance which adds strength to my ideas on the caste system. This time it is about the josyar (astrologer) Ramaswamy who was our astrologer. The horoscope of everyone in our family was cast by him and even today I remember his predictions which were correct. His literacy was very limited and he knew the subject of astrology only through verses. He used to tell me that his father taught all the verses to him. Unfortunately, he belonged to a lower caste and his house was not located along with the agricultural labourers of our village.</p>
 <p>Similar to the above two castes, there were some more groups like dhobies who were distinct entities in the village. However, the main group which consisted of agricultural labourers, masons, carpenters etc., lived on the same street. Based on my experience, I have no hesitation in saying that the caste system was deviced during the Neolithic period to sustain the knowledge gained and to make it useful to the society. Readers may be interested to know that Rajaji, probably, had similar views and tried to strengthen the knowledge base of the castes. His views were opposed vehemently by other politicians resulting in his losing the Chief Ministership of Tamil Nadu.</p>
 <p>Recently I read the views of a scholar on the subject who stated that the origin of the system is an enigma. There are also people who say that the caste system is one of the worst evils plaguing India today. According to the well known model, white-skinned nomads, who conveniently forgot where they were wandering before they reached the Indus Valley, imposed the caste system to subjugate the native population. According to this model, castes are identified as four (Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras). A sitting judge of the Supreme Court of India, Markanday Katju, wrote two articles in “The Hindu”, the first one of which was published on 9th Jan 2009. He said “In theory there were only four castes, Brahmins, Kshtriyas, Vaishyas and Sudras. This, however, was only a piece of fiction. In reality there were (and still are) hundreds, if not thousands of castes and subcastes in India, many of which do not fit into the four traditional castes. For example, there are Yadavs, Kurmis, Jats, Kayasthas, Bumihars, and Gosains.” Also according to Ramaswamy Pichappan (Professor, Madurai Kumaraj University), who knows the ground reality much better than many others, has stated that there are 3,824 castes and tribes in India (in a paper read by him in a UNESCO conference). The above discussion pertains mainly to the material advancement caused by the revolution. It was the caste system which was keeping the fire alive for almost ten thousand years but for which today’s world would not be as advanced as it is today. Probably, because of its importance, Dohzhausky considered the caste system of India as one of the greatest experiments of nature.</p>
 <p>As David Frawley and Rajaram have suggested, the foundation for the knowledge explosion in religion, philosophy, cosmology, linguistics and particularly grammar, mathematics, astronomy, medicine etc was laid in the South of India and taken to Indus-Saraswathi region by the people who had to migrate due to rise in the sea level after the last Ice age. The point for consideration is the way in which the knowledge of the refugees saw fantastic development which is the very foundation of today’s modern science etc. Most of the teachers of the time were Rishis and they had their ashrams on the banks of the life-giving rivers. The students who were initiated in such ashrams had to face strict entrance examinations and they were expected to be brahmacharis during the period of their stay in the Ashram. The Rishi, his family and the students lived as a small community, each one doing his or her bit to sustain the institution by following a strict discipline. Money had no role to play in the education system and intellectual excellence was the sole criteria to sustain the system. The students got knowledge from their Rishis and also had full freedom to develop their own ideas on their subject of study. It is this excellent system of education that produced the Vedas and later works like Ashtadhyayi by Panini and works of Aryabhatta & Bhaskaracharya. Later, this system was the foundation to develop great universities in Taxila, Nalanda etc. If there are modern universities which do outstanding research work, this was made possible only by the strong foundation laid by people who populated Indus Saraswathi at one time. The system produced great intellectuals who made outstanding contributions on various subjects.</p>
 <p>It is very clear that the Neolithic knowledge gained in Kumari Kandam experienced fantastic development in the IndusSaraswathi region through the two different systems deviced by our ancients known as the Caste system and the Gurukula system. The former system was deviced mainly for training new generations within the family and the system worked quite like nature itself. In the Gurukula system, however, there was necessity to keep alive the creative efforts of the people involved and for this they deviced a system of oral transmission from generation to generation. The oral transmission method that they devised is a tribute to their outstanding genius because of which we are able to hear the Vedas even today - the same way they were chanted on the banks of Saraswathi many millennia ago. Such a preservation of knowledge is the reason for the following comments by the French scholar Jean Le Mee (1975), “The pyramids have been eroded by the desert wind, the marble broken by the earthquakes and the gold stolen by robbers, while the Veda is recited daily by an unbroken chain of generations, travelling like a great wave through the living substance of mind”.</p>
 <p>Our ancients gave equal importance to history also and in my opinion, the Puranas and Ithihas are nothing but embedded history. Our ancients did not have the facilities that El Beruni had but they had to preserve the historical details at a time when there was no script or any other method of recording. In spite of this deficiency, they have done a wonderful job in coining stories conveying important historical details like Samudra Manthana. In the very olden days, when senior Rishis used to visit a distant Ashrams, everyone there would request the honoured guest to narrate Puranic stories and the like. If the world has benefited from Neolithic knowledge and the knowledge explosion at the Saraswathi region it was mainly due to the caste system and the Gurukula system.</p>
 <p>While discussing the paper co-authored by him along with David Reich etc., Dr. Thangaraj of CCMB, Hyderabad, has given his views on the caste system to the media published by the Hindu on 24th Sept 2009. According to him “the caste system is not recent. The social stratification existed right from early human divergence some 50,000-60,000 years ago”. Therefore, it was most probable that at the Neolithic time, the rudiments of caste that existed earlier became well established occupational divisions of castes.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
