<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-205">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">ABSTRACT THINKING</h1>
		<p>The story of the crow dropping stones in a jar containing very little water is well known. When sufficient stones were dropped the water level came up and the crow could quench its thirst. The idea conveyed by this old Indian story has been confirmed by British scientists when a crow bent a wire and pulled out a piece of food from a tall jar. Tool making of this kind requires analysis, ideation and abstract thinking capability. Birds and animals are endowed with abstract-thinking capability to a very limited extent, but with humans it manifests in a big way. Among humans also, all the groups do not have the same level of abstract thinking capability which develops slowly depending on the duration of exposure conducive to its development.</p>
 <p>Scientists tell us that the main distinguishing feature between a modern human and other hominids is the brain size. It is the enlargement of the brain as an evolutionary process that makes a modern human. During the early days of physical anthropology, scientists were obsessed with the measurement of minute differences in skull measurements. Paul Broca, a French man, was the originator of this discipline and his influential book made many scientists of the time take to such measurements. As brain development was an evolutionary process, people believed that scholars’ children would be scholars. Talmud, a collection of ancient Jewish laws, urged people to go to any extent in order to marry a scholar’s daughter. However, today we know that a musicians’ son or daughter need not be a musician. However, if the talent was present for many generations, as can be seen in music-oriented families of India, the chances of this occurring are more. If a society has been used to, say, abstract thinking for many generations, we can see a higher percentage of talent in that society. This means that if Indians are good in abstract thinking or creative thinking then they have been thinkers for longer periods than others.</p>
 <p>Now let us analyze how this talent evolved in three groups of people who got isolated from each other around 60,000 years ago. The Andaman tribes were very small in numbers and probably there was no one among them to trigger the evolution of thinking capability. The African group was much bigger and they did see some development in certain areas. The Kumari group was probably very large and there were people with many diverse talents amongst them to trigger the development of the brain in different directions -- including abstract and creative thinking.</p>
 <p>In May 2008, I came across a news item that a 11 year old student of Indian origin living in US won the National Geographic Bee competition. He won $25,000 prize money and a life-time membership of the National Geographic Society. Akshay Rajagopal topped the list of ten finalists which had other Indian boys. Later he visited Bangalore along with his parents and I had a couple of pleasant meetings with the boy when he visited us. Close on the heels of the above competition, another boy of Indian origin won the U.S. spelling championship. His name is Sameer Mishra and he is among the four boys of Indian origin who were among the twelve who qualified for the final. The second place in the competition also went to a boy of Indian origin, 12 year old Sidharth Chand, a seventh grade student. The story of youngsters of Indian origin winning the first place in spelling Bee National Geographic competition is continuing for the fourth year in succession till 2011. On 12th March 2009, I came across a media report that three Indian-Americans were among the top ten high school scientists in the U.S. selected by INTEL through a nationwide competition involving hundreds of students. The success of these children of Indian origin made me wonder why a small ethnic group in the U.S. exhibited such extraordinary talent. In June 2008, I came across another news item that Oxford University considers Indian students among the best in the world. Though Indians students are less in number, they have won more scholarships than the Chinese. The previous year they won 54 different scholarships including the prestigious Rhodes scholarships. Then I looked back to the time when I was a student in Cranfield. Highly respected Professor Ward used to make similar remarks.</p>
 <p>When I was working at the aircraft industry in Bangalore, I used to meet one German engineer who was marketing aircraft fasteners. He was a German by birth and was a citizen of the U.S. He used to say that he was proud of his German origin and the fact that he was a citizen of the most prosperous country in the world. Yet he felt no one could beat an Indian in abstract thinking. This statement was due to his personal experience working with Indians in the U.S. In the late 1960’s, Indians were considered as not comparable to Westerners but things have now changed in a big way ever since the Indians have taken to computer software as fish to water.</p>
 <p>From the above, it would be most reasonable to conclude that Indians were used to abstract thinking for a long period of time than the others. Therefore, if we project the picture backwards by about 60,000 years, certainly the abstract thinking capability of Kumari Indians must have been superior to that of the ancient Africans of that time. Therefore, if any technological advances had taken place around 60,000 years ago, Indians would have definitely had a hand in it. It is also clear that the Indians had a head start as far as abstract thinking is concerned and therefore, it is the only population capable of being responsible for the Neolithic Revolution. As Samudra Mathana is part of the history of Indians, there is enough confirmatory evidence that the Neolithic Revolution took place South of India and was then transported to such far off places as Jericho, Mehgrah and China etc. almost simultaneously.</p>
 <p>Even though I am discussing the subject of abstract thinking as part of the cultural journey to find out the place where Neolithic Revolution took place, I want to share another product of my investigation. During my very long services as an aircraft engineer, I have had the privilege of selecting Dalit candidates for engineering jobs. Some of them had worked under me directly. I was surprised to find that quite a number of them, first time graduates in the family, exhibited a high level of abstract thinking. This naturally led me to think about the origin of the Dalit groups.</p>
 <p>During the early thirties, there have been two troublesome periods for my father. We used to live in a small community of Brahmins who followed their strict `do’s and `don’ts and we were obliged to follow them. Brahmins used to have a hair style known as Kudumi which was shaving the front portion and leaving a tuft of hair at the rear portion of the head. One day, my elder brother, who was a rebel, cut off his Kudumi and got a cropped hair style as all of us have today. The village revolted and my father was most disturbed because of the fear that our family would be easily ex-communicated. Fortunately, due to the efforts of liberal minded Brahmins, the problem was sorted out when my brother agreed to cover his head with a cloth and not walk in front of the other Brahmin’s houses. A few years later, the same brother caused another storm. This time he decided to go to Singapore by ship which was taboo for Brahmins. My father was again worried about becoming an outcaste. I am narrating these incidents to establish the origin of Dalits. Probably, they became outcastes for not adhering to the code of behavior of some caste or tribe. If my ideas are confirmed, Dalit population must have been part of the 4000 castes and tribes but were expelled from them mostly for minor lapses. Rather I would like to suggest that Dalits were not the under dogs for long periods of time and some of them at least were from families who were leading thinkers for thousands of years.</p>
 <p>Abstract thinking capability of various Jewish tribes seems to have been investigated very well. It is worth making a similar effort with respect of other groups of people around the world which may reveal startling new insights into the origin of civilization and also migrations.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
