<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-206">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">TOLERENCE</h1>
		<p>Humans were after all animals to begin with and the very long years of cultural development might have given some of them the most precious quality of tolerance. It is a quality which cannot be acquired in a short span of time and millennia after millennia of deep thinking and practice only would have made the humans acquire the trait of tolerance. That is why people who had this quality are considered very great, be it Jesus who advised a person to offer the other cheek or the Mahatma who exhibited indomitable courage and tolerance when he was thrown out of the train by a white man. As it is the most difficult trait to acquire, people who acquired it in full measure may not be many.</p>
		<p>As per our theory, Hinduism was born in the islands or landmass South of India long, long ago, probably tens of thousands of years before any other religion was born. Therefore, we should see the highest level of tolerance in the society which spread to India and further to other places. Also, as the spread of population is a very slow process, we can see the decreasing level of tolerance as we progress farther and farther from the place of origin. This we have seen in the tolerant Buddhists who were losing their tolerance level as they spread farther and farther from their place of origin.</p>
		<p>For instance, Buddhism and Jainism taught Universal tolerance. Hindu society however, was a different one. It had one class known as Brahmins who were the torch bearers of Hindu culture and they were subjected to many restrictions to make them the most tolerant group on Earth. I understand that for the same crime committed, the punishment imposed on the Brahmin was 64 times harsher than that imposed on say a labourer. Therefore, Hindu culture nurtured the highest level of tolerance in the Brahmin. There was also another group of people who were trained to fight and their job was to protect the society from aggressors. Thus, there were two groups in the society with a totally different outlook - one for protection of the society with license to be violent if necessary and another abjuring violence under any provocation.</p>
		<p>A rough idea of tolerance levels of different groups of people can be obtained by comparing the crime rates of such groups. I remember to have read sometime in 2005 that the crime rate in India is quite small when compared with that of the United States. The average number of recorded crimes committed annually per one lakh inhabitants in India and the US were 180 and 8720 respectively. Similarly, even within India, the crime rate in the Southern parts seems to be less than that seen in the Northern States such as Bihar or U.P Today, it is possible to map the tolerance level of various parts of the world by measuring the crime rate. A higher crime rate may also be due to efficient reporting and recording of crimes. Allowance has to be given for this while comparing crime rates at different places. If this is mapped, it will give a rough indication of the original place of cultural development. In India, the South seems to be having a lesser crime rate and therefore the spread of culture might have been in the direction from South to North. Talking of the whole world no other major country won its freedom through peaceful means as India did and therefore, we can tentatively conclude that it is Indian culture which spread to other parts of the world.</p>
		<p>Having hesitantly suggested a possible measure to understand migration of population, let us see some of the interesting tit bits concerning tolerance levels. Sometime back I had read in an article by Cho. Ramswamy that the great Adi Shankara travelled from Patna towards South India in search of a suitable place to establish his Mutt. At one place, he saw a snake spreading its hood to protect a frog from the hot sun. I take this statement as an euphemism to convey the high level of tolerance seen in that place. Adi Shankara made a quick choice and chose Sringeri, in Karnataka to set up his Mutt. The real message is that Karnataka has probably been the most tolerant place in India at the times of Adi Shankara.</p>
		<p>The second episode I would like to give is the statement of a Dalit leader in The Hindu dated 26th July 2007 [page 8]. The person concerned is a Dalit writer from Karnataka and former member of the National Book Trust [K.B. Siddiah]. He told the press that many Dalit writers and activists had been hurling abuses at Brahmins ever since Independence, but the Brahmin community had retaliated only through democratic ways and shown tolerance. He further stated “I request the others to learn a lesson from the Brahmins. The latter reacted with dignity and firmness whenever we [Dalit] criticize them. They have grown taller in the eyes of all sections of society”. It is the Dalit leader who has to be praised for his courage to revise his ideas when he realised the truth.</p>
		<p>The smallest unit of a society being the family, the tolerance level of an individual family could be a good yardstick to measure the tolerance level of a nation or a group of people.</p>
		<p>Marriage relationships can easily reveal the tolerance level of families. If we know the divorce rates of nations we can understand their tolerance levels. Fortunately in 2007, I came across some statistics regarding the divorce rates of nations which were computed for the year 2005. According to this, India stood first for the least percentage of divorces at 1.1% with Srilanka being a close second. As against this, the divorce rate in the United States was 54.8% and in Sweden the rate was 54.9%. I do agree that these rates are not due to tolerance levels alone. Other contributory factors may be freedom of women and their economic independence. Statisticians, being a clever lot, could rework the statistics giving suitable weightage for various factors involved. I am sure that even if we do that the disparity may still be quite substantial. This will be another evidence to prove that Indian civilization is the original one having the longest uninterrupted period of progress. It is a matter of regret that Indian families are losing the precious trait of tolerance acquired through tens of thousands of years and the divorce rates of Indians, who want to ape the West in every way, is increasing alarmingly in recent years.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
