<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-207">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">RELIGION</h1>
		<p>We know very well that India is one country which has not rejected the old ideas, practices and customs while accepting and adopting the modern ones. Therefore, we can learn a lot about our ancient history by studying the present religious practices and identify features which can be called “living history”.</p>
		<p>From the living history seen in South India, it is possible to reconstruct the manner in which religious ideas evolved among ‘modern humans’. First it started with the fear of a supernatural force. At the next stage, a tree, a stone or a particular item was worshipped by people. In order to propitiate the designated item, the offering of flowers became a practice. I remember the views of a Tamil author who said that in the early days they offered flowers to divine things which in Tamil could be called Poosai which means ‘offer flowers’ in Tamil. Even today the process of worshipping is known as Poosai. When the Tamil word got Sanskritised it became Pooja. In stages, the designated item for worship must have got a shelter and finally became an idol in feminine form kept in a small shed for worship. Small ideas were added by each generation and each tribe that became the foundation for the religion. Thus, the oldest religion of the world had no single person who gave shape to it and it was a sort of organic growth of religious ideas from the grass root level. The religion had no name as there was only one of its type and it is the outsiders who named it the Hindu religion. The view of the philosopher President of India is most appropriate when he stated that Hinduism is not a religion but religion. The most popular village temples have been Amman temples which had an idol in feminine form and the Goddesses were called by myriad names such as Mariamman, Kaliamman, Petchiamman, Pidariamman, Angulaparameswariamman, Draupadiamman, Renuka Devi etc. One can see many such Amman temples in modern metros like Bangalore where ancient bizarre rituals such as ‘mayana kollai’ are practiced during festivals.</p>
		<p>In the interior parts of South India, devotees and priests drink the blood of the birds and animals that are scarified indicating the antiquity of such practices. Therefore, looking at tree worship and Amman temples we can certainly identify the evolution of religious ideas during the very early days of modern humans. The most important point we can pick up from Amman worship is the place given to the mother in the society. The mother was considered as the most important person in a family and this was probably the origin for “Mother worship”.</p>
		<p>After looking at the Mother worship and bizarre rituals, let us now see whether they had any effect on the social structure of the society. There is ample proof to state that Mother worship influenced the social structure in the South and South of India. Obviously, nuclear families emerged only in the South of India and in these families pride of place was given to the mother. The mother centric system known as marumakkattayam was practiced in Kerala till recently and still practiced by some South Indian tribes. It is equally worth noting that royal succession in Kerala has always been through the female line. Even in communities like mine, which practice the Vedic rituals, maternal uncles of the couple are given a pride of place during marriage ceremonies.</p>
		<p>The matrilineal system seen in certain parts of South India, especially Kerala, is also prevalent in North East India among the Khasi tribe. If one goes further East, towards Burma and Northern Thailand, we come across such a practice. Among the Karen people of the area, it is the women who control the wealth and the same status is passed on to their daughters. As a youngster, I knew of the matrilineal system practiced in Kerala and other parts of South India as I used to hear many stories from Kerala people who used to live in my village. Later, I also knew that when the British wrote the civil code for India they made allowance for both the systems [matrilineal and patrilineal] in the law books of the country. Therefore, it is quite clear that the matrilineal system was the original one which got modified later on.</p>
		<p>The beauty of Indian civilization is that it has experimented with all types of practical systems in respect of marriage, religious ideas, inheritance etc. For instance, we see that there have been 8 types of marriages. In religion, we have the three famous philosophies such as Advaita, Dvaita and Visishtadvaita. Even in the matter of attaining salvation, we have karma yoga, bakthi yoga, gyana yoga etc. In the case of inheritance, we have the matrilineal and patrilineal system. The reason for this variety is probably the fact that the Kumari population had to evolve a social structure for the first time and it rightly experimented with various systems as a modern researcher would do.</p>
		<p>Talking further about the topsy -turvy system [practiced by Karen people], we have already suggested that at the end of the last Ice age, there was a mass exodus of humans from places like Jambudvipa in Indian Ocean. We also stated that the Dravidians, the originators of Mother worship, and the Nagas, who were their close neighbours, migrated to places like Bengal, North East India etc. There are many tribes in North East such as Kashi tribes who still follow the matrilineal system.</p>
		<p>Therefore, discussion on Mother worship has not only revealed the evolution of religious ideas but it also gives an indication of the migration pattern of the Nagas which was towards Bengal, North East India, Burma and further on to Thailand etc. Readers will be justified in asking why I am discussing matrilinear system while on the subject of religion. Even though I have identified certain religious practices as old ones, I do not know how old they are. I have to have some handle to steer my ideas for fixing the time period when the practices described above were followed by the society.</p>
		<p>There is some reference to time if we look at the change from matrilineal to patrilineal systems. As described elsewhere, the change took place in the Saraswathi heart land where the Aryan people moved from South around 8,000 years ago. Therefore, it is quite reasonable to assume that religious practices we talked about were much older than 8,000 years ago. If the change from matrilineal practice had taken place around 8,000 years ago, the matrilineal practice should have existed and practiced for many thousands of years ago. When we say that the matrilineal system was an outcome of Mother worship, we can safely predict that Mother worship must have been practiced much before the Neolithic Revolution (or in other words between 10,000 years and 20,000 ago).</p>
		<p>Regarding the time period when ‘Mother Goddess’ worship originated in Kumari Kandam, I explored whether any tell-tale marks existed to the West of India where people had migrated after the Neolithic Revolution. We know that Neolithic farmers existed in Mesopotomia, Sumer and Babylonia. The Sumerian civilization was existing around 6,000 years ago and many scholars had noticed similarities between the Dravidian civilization and the Sumerian civilization. K.P. Aravanan in his ‘History of Tamil people’ (in Tamil) has brought out many facts connecting the peoples of these two civilizations. Most importantly, the matrilineal system practiced in South India was found among the Elamites.</p>
		<p>In the Kumari Model, it is the Neolithic farmers who are supposed to have spread agriculture from Iran to Syria. It has also been established that the people who took the Neolithic knowledge to those places from Kumari were mostly Dravidians along with some Nagas. At the time of the migration around 10,000 years ago, Dravidians and Nagas practiced the matrilineal system as seen in the many parts of South India. So this is another confirmation that ‘Mother Goddess’ worship and the matrilineal system would have originated in Kumari before the Neolithic Revolution.</p>
		<p>This discussion on religion, particularly ‘Mother Goddess’ worship reveals many historical secrets. It is clear ‘Mother Goddess’ worship and the associated matrilineal practice had spread to other places through South India as we have sufficient evidence in South India in the form of ‘living history’. These practices seem to be the hallmark of people who introduced agriculture in far off places. Therefore, agriculture was developed by people who followed the ancient practices of Amman worship and matrilineal system. This line of argument adds another evidence that the Neolithic Revolution would have taken place in Kumari Kandam.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
