<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-301">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">INTRODUCTION</h1>
		<p>The existing human population of the world consists of only ‘modern humans’ who are all similar anatomically and in behaviour. According to the accepted views of genetic scientists, `the modern human’ is supposed to have had his beginning only recently, i.e. 150,000 to 200,000 years ago. Around 100,000 years ago, the world was occupied by humans other than ‘modern humans’ and all the diverse groups of humans called ‘hominids’. Apart from modern humans known as ‘Homo sapiens’, there were ‘Peking man’ and ‘Java man’ classified as ‘Homo erectus’ who lived in Asia and ‘Homo Neanderthal’ who lived mostly in Europe. Our species is known as Homo Sapiens meaning ‘wise man’ because of the well developed intellect. The brain size of pre-modern humans was smaller than ours but much bigger than that of the apes. However, pre-modern man walked upright like modern man. Surprisingly, this diversity among hominids vanished around 30,000 years ago when the pre-modern human species completely vanished leaving behind only the modern humans. It is generally accepted that hominids branched off from apes around five million years ago and modern humans evolved around 150,000 to 200,000 years ago. The big debate today is to establish from where and how modern humans evolved.</p>
		<p>Today there are two well known models regarding the evolution of modern humans - ‘the multi-regional continuity model’ and the ‘out of Africa model’. The former contends that after Homo erectus left Africa around two million years ago and dispersed in Asia and Europe, and the regional population slowly evolved into modern humans. According to the ‘Out of Africa Model’, modern humans evolved in Africa, migrated towards Asia and Europe and replaced all other hominids that descended from Homo erectus without interbreeding.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-301-01">*</a></sup> Till recently, the pictures that emerged were based on anatomical and archeological evidence. Today, the branch of science known as genetics has come to our help in a big way. However, genetics is a new science and it is still evolving. Even though it gives very valuable inputs in understanding human origins and migrations, there are areas where interpretation of genetic data could go wrong and distorted pictures may emerge if they are not double checked through other independent means. Luca Cavelli Sforza has suggested a multidisciplinary approach is indispensable to get a correct picture of the ancient migration.</p>  <p>Out of the two models mentioned above the ‘Multiregional Model’ is losing ground and the ‘Out of Africa Model’ seems to be the present favourite. However, it still remains a theory and it cannot be accepted as a final one till all doubts and anomalies of this particular model are sorted out satisfactorily.</p>
		<p>The foundation for the ‘Out of Africa Model’ is the proposition that Africa was the place where modern humans evolved more than 150,000 years ago and they remained there till 60,000 years ago when they began their migrations. The deepest genetic roots of modern humans are found only in Africa and the genetic diversity noticed in Africa is higher than that outside Africa. Therefore, they are supposed to have inhabited Africa for the longest period of time when compared with people in other parts of the world. According to genetics, these two reasons are good enough to establish the deepest roots of human evolution in Africa.</p>
		<p>There are clear cut genetic evidence to show that there has been a split in the African population around 60,000 years ago. One group migrated ‘out of Africa’ and the other one stayed on in Africa. The group that left Africa started with the Y marker M168 and all of us outside Africa were born of this M168 father. M168 gave birth to M130 and M89 markers. According to this theory, people who developed M130 after leaving Africa migrated along what is described as a coastal super highway. Thus, the main theory gave rise to what is known as ‘Coastal Migration Theory’. Let us discuss this new theory and establish its merits and demerits.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
