<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-303">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">KUMARI KANDAM</h1>
<p>So far, I have been making oblique references to Kumari rather than giving a complete picture about this place. Therefore, it is now necessary for me to state in clear terms as to what I mean by the term ‘Kumari Model’. It has to be very clearly understood that I am not one of the early ones to propose the Kumari Model. It has been in the minds of many Tamil scholars for long and many have lamented the loss of the Kumari continent which probably prompted Sumathi Ramaswamy to name the chapters in her book, ‘The lost land of Kumari’ as ‘Placing Loss’, ‘Science in the service of loss’, ‘Occult losses’ ‘Living loss lands end’, ‘Mapping loss’ ... etc. It seems that the Tamil Nadu Government has invested in making a full length film on the subject. Kumari Kandam has been an important subject of discussion in the successive World Tamil Conferences. Regarding the geography of the now submerged Kumari continent, there are many maps prepared by Tamil enthusiasts.</p>
 <p>Kumari Kandam is also called Lemuria by some modern scientists. Tamil writers and occultists have given their own versions of Lemuria or Kumai Kandam. Unfortunately, the picture is confused and the maps of Kumari Kandam proposed by them have questionable features. However, some details about Kumari seem to be reasonable. As ancient Tamil literature is the very foundation for proposing the Kumari Model, let us briefly narrate some of the important details contained therein. There was a continent in the Indian Ocean to the South of India which was swallowed by the sea in stages. It had a mountain range known as Meru and had major rivers known as Pahruli in the South and Kumari in the North. South Madurai, the first capital of Pandyas, was on the banks of Pahruli River where the early Sangam was held. Kapatapuram, on the banks of Kumari, was the capital of Pandyas after South Madurai was swallowed by the sea and the place where the middle Sangam was held. Kapatapuram gets confirmatory reference from the Ramayana. At the time when people migrated to the Saraswathi area etc after the end of the last Ice age, the area from where they migrated was probably a large island. This confirmation comes from the sankalpam that a Hindu chants even today. In the sankalpam he says that he is from Jambudvipa. Naturally, this would be the place from where he migrated to India. In the Puranas we read that there were seven islands including Jambu Island. We find similar references in Tamil literature too where it is called ‘Naval Theevu’ meaning Jambudvipa.</p>
 <p>We learn about Kumari Kandam from the commentaries to the vast literature produced during the Sangams. Therefore, let us briefly explain the Tamil Sangams and when they were held. Tamil was nurtured by a great institution known as Sangam. Sangams were assemblies of poets patronized by the great Pandian Kings. Even though there were many Sangams, there were three most important Sangams known as the early, medieval and the last Sangam. The works during the first and the middle Sangams were lost except Tholkappiam written by Tholkappiyar during the middle Sangam. However, the commentators during the last Sangam have given details about the two earlier Sangams. There are also references about them in other Tamil literature and legends. If we put together all the details about the various Sangams, there are certain inconsistencies as in the case of the Puranas. Therefore, here also we are talking of events which happened thousands of years ago and it is natural that unwanted distortions have taken place during transmission from one generation to another as in the case of the Puranas.</p>
 <p>The first Sangam is supposed to have existed for about 4449 years. Similarly, the middle Sangam existed for about 3700 years. The last Sangam existed for about 1950 years from 1715 B.C to 235 A.D. Regarding the total number of years for each of the Sangams, there are some controversies. Probably, if we assume that the continuity was broken during the individual periods, we can account for the number of kings who have patronized these Sangams. One of the notable controversies is about the period of Tholkappiyar. He is supposed to have been part of the middle Sangam. It seems Tholakappiyar has referred to Sanskrit. Then the confusion of AIT came in and according to AIT, the Aryans were supposed to have come to India around 1500 B.C. and introduced Sanskrit. But, the middle Sangam was certainly held before 2000 B.C. Fortunately, this controversy could easily be solved as we now know that the Vedas were composed between 4000 B.C. and 2500 B.C. by indigenous poets and not by outsiders from the Steppes entering India through the North Western corridor.</p>
 <p>Now talking of the Sangams, the first one that lasted for 4449 years was patronized by 89 Pandyan Kings starting from Kaaychina Vazuthi and ending with Kadukkone. Some of the members of the Sangam were Sivapiran, Kumarvel, Agasthiyar etc. It is the Agasthiyar of Vaadapi who wrote the first book of Tamil grammar known as Agathiyam. This Sangam was held in South Madurai on the banks of Pahruli River.</p>
 <p>The first and the last Kings of the middle Sangam were Iriyinoor Vendoor Chezian and Mudathiramaran respectively. The total number of Kings who were patrons was 59. Tholakappiyar was a member of the middle Sangam and his work Tholkappaiam is the only work from the first two Sangams available to us. This Sangam was held in Kapatapuram on the banks of Kumari River, a place which finds mention in the Ramayana. As there is no mention of South Madurai in the Ramayana, it would be reasonable to conclude that it disappeared into the sea at the time of the Ramayana which can be taken as 5000 B.C.</p>
 <p>Of the three Sangams we have clarity about the date of the last Sangam only. This Sangam was held in present day Madurai in Tamil Nadu, the well known capital of the Pandyan dynasty. Silappadikaram and Manimekalai were the works done during the last Sangam. Research on the subject has indicated that these works must have been produced during 2nd century A.D. The other works pertaining to the last Sangam must have been produced earlier. The time periods when the Sangams were in existence are as follows, according to scholar Chidambaranar.</p>
<table>
<tr>
<td>Early Sangam</td>
<td>14004 B.C. to 9564 B.C</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Middle Sangam</td>
<td>6805 B.C. to 3104 B.C.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Last Sangam </td>
<td>1715 B.C. to 235 A.D.</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>In his book ‘WE TAMILS’, Sangarapalli also gives the dates for Sangams and the various deluge. They are follows:</p>
<table>
<tr>
	<td>First Deluge</td>
	 <td>14490 B.C.</td>
	 </tr>
	 <tr>
<td>Primal Sangam</td>
 <td> 14004 B.C. – 9594 B.C.</td>
 </tr>
	 <tr>
<td>Second Deluge</td>
 <td> 9594 B.C.</td>
 </tr>
	 <tr>
<td>Medieval Sangam</td>
 <td> 6805 B.C. – 3105 B.C.</td>
 </tr>
	 <tr>
<td>Deluge Again</td>
 <td> 3105 B.C.</td>
 </tr>
	 <tr>
<td>The Beginning of Kaliyuga</td>
 <td> 3105 B.C.</td>
 </tr>
	 <tr>
<td>The Deluge [old Bible]</td>
 <td> 2344 B.C.</td>
 </tr>
	 <tr>
<td>Last Sangam</td>
 <td> 1715 B.C. – 235 A.D.</td>
 </tr>
	 </table>
	 <p>There is a fair amount of coincidence in the dates of the Sangams given by Chidambaranar and Sangarapilli. Similarly, the dates for the deluge are also in line with the dates given by many other authors.</p>
 <p>The practice of Sangams honouring one poet every year, is followed in Tamil Nadu even today for Carnatic music. The institution is known as the Music Academy and during the major part of the 20th century and subsequently, the Academy has been selecting and honouring one musician every year with the title ‘Sangeetha Kalanidhi’. The title is a coveted one for all Carnatic musicians and it is the Nobel for Carnatic music.</p>
 <p>No one, other than interested Tamils, seems to have accepted the existence of a vast continent in the Indian Ocean known as Kumari Kandam barring occultists and some odd Western scientists. Therefore, in order to prove its existence, we have to look at it scientifically. First and foremost, we should discuss the sea levels during the last 100,000 years which will help us to establish the truth. Secondly, the present features in the Indian Ocean seen against the background of rising sea levels in ancient times may enlighten us further. Then we can rely on ‘living history’ to some extent. Lastly and most importantly, a reinterpretation of genetic data may clinch the issue.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
