<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-305">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">LIVING FOSSILS</h1>
		<p>There are a group of islands in the Bay of Bengal known as Anadaman and Nicobar islands [Fig 3.2] and they are a part of India. At the moment, the Andaman Islands are inhabited by four Negrito type stone age tribes. They are the Andamanese, Onge, Santanelese and Jarawa tribes. The government has befriended the first two tribes who are now settled and receive food and other types of aid. The Santanelese and Jarawa, however, are holding on to their hunter - gatherer life-style. Two Mongoloid tribes live in the Nicobar Islands and they are known as Nicobarese and Shompen. Genetic studies indicate that the Nicobarese are Neolithic settlers of recent origin.</p>
 <p>However, the Shompen still follow the hunter - gatherer life-style and are supposed to be free from disease which confirms their antiquity. The Shompen have light yellow coloured skin, straight hair and narrow eyes and therefore, they can be classified as Mongoloid. Out of the six tribes living in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, at least three of them, viz. the Santanelese, Jarawa and Shompen, are not very much affected by modern civilization and therefore, we can call them ‘living fossils’. We can infer quite a bit of ancient history from these ‘living fossils’.</p>
 <p>An important aspect about the Andaman Nicobar islands is that the present areas above the sea are actually hill tops. According to the Encyclopedia of India Tribes Series - 7, edited by Dr. S.S. Sashi, they are not coral islands but consist of a sunken range of mountains, only the tops of which are above the water. The height of these mountains seems to be 14,000 ft. about 12,000 ft is under the water. The highest peak on Andaman Islands is the Saddle Peak which is about 2500 ft. above sea level.</p>
 <p>Dr. Thangaraj of the Centre for Cellular and Microbiological studies, Hyderabad, has been very helpful and he promptly sent me papers published by him and his colleagues. Even though they have done a lot of genetic studies on the Andaman tribes, including Nicobarese, they have not done any work concerning the Shompen. In their paper published in 2006, the authors have indicated that “The Andaman ‘Negrito’ population do not show particular affinities either with African population or with the Indian population, confirming their unique origin.” A similar conclusion has been arrived at in the recent studies conducted by David Reich, Thangaraj and others. Therefore, it can be surmised that the tribes were not a part of the exodus from Africa to Australia through the coastal high way, if at all there was such an exodus.</p>
 <p>An important point to be noted is regarding the food habits of the Stone age tribes in Africa before the exodus. According to the ‘Coastal Migration Theory’, the game available for hunting got drastically reduced and the African tribes had to shift to the coastal areas which made them acquire a liking for sea food. To examine this theory, let us examine the present food habits of Shompen and Onge. The Shompen collect pandanus fruits from the forests and these are cut to extract the nuts. Nuts are boiled and then scraped to extract the dough. Fibres are removed and pandanus fibreless dough balls are eaten with honey or pork or meat. They also eat wild fruits honey and fish. The staple food of the Onge tribe is boiled mangrove seeds. They also collect honey and eat fish. The point to note is that the tribes also ate vegetarian food which is their staple food. They do eat small game and fish and are not madly enamoured by sea food as pictured in the Coastal Migration Theory. If so, they could have easily settled in the shore areas of the small islands to collect sea food. The most probable picture that emerges is that the ‘living fossils’ were not part of the African exodus around 60,000 years ago. The ‘living fossils’ in Andaman Nicobar islands seem to have been there from 60,000 years ago. This means that there has been a split around 60,000 years ago separating them from the main group. The Andaman Nicobar tribes being a very small group continued to live in the same way as they lived at the time of separation from the main group. The main group in the Indian Ocean area was probably very large with diverse talents enabling them to make advances in civilization. A very interesting feature of the Andaman - Nicobar population at the time of separation was it consisted of people with darker and lighter colours. The Shompen tribe of Nicobar clearly indicates that the separation was post-Mongoloid, i.e. the people with Mongoloid features were existing at the time of separation. The presence of San tribe in Africa also probably gives us a similar indication.</p>
 <p>A good number of research studies concerning the origin of Andaman tribes have been carried out during recent times. For our purpose, we are interested in two papers. The first one is titled “Unique origin of Andaman Islanders; insight from autosomal loci” authored by K. Thangaraj et al of Centre of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad. According to this paper, the Andaman Negrito population do not show any particular affinity either with the African population or with the Indian population, confirming their unique origin. This paper was published on 19th August 2006. The second paper is a recent one titled “Reconstructing Indian Population History” authored by David Reich, Kumaraswamy Thangaraj, Nick Patterson, Alkes L `Price and Lalji Singh. They have identified two ancestral population of most Indians today and these are the “Ancestral North Indians” (ANI) and the “Ancestral South Indians” (ASI). Groups with only ASI ancestry may no longer exist in mainland India. However, the indigenous Andaman Islanders are unique in being ASI related groups without ANI ancestry.</p>
 <p>In one paper, it is genetically confirmed that the Andaman population do not show any affinity to the African population. Therefore, the Andaman tribes are not migrants from Africa and their origin is different. The second paper states that the Andaman Islanders are unique as they are ASI related. ASI relationship between South Indians and Andaman tribes is possible only if both of them had a single origin to begin with.</p>
 <p>Thus, the ‘living fossil’ of the Andaman has provided scientific proof that a landmass common to India and Andaman existed from where the ASI migrated to India as well as to Andaman island. Therefore, it will be most reasonable to suggest that the unique Andaman population belonged to the Kumar Continent which means that the Kumari Continent did exist.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
