<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-307">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">KUMARI MODEL</h1>
		<p>It is very clear that India has been a melting pot of culture andgenes resulting in human diversity in a cultural sense as wellas in the genetic sense. Recent genetic research has clearlyindicated that most of the genotypes in the world are presentin India. As it is not possible to claim that evolution took placein India, the only way to explain the diversity is that everygenotype has passed through India. Thus, India can beconsidered as a super highway for many migrations of modernhumans from nearby areas. The only nearby area that fits intothe picture is the Kumari Kandam mentioned in our ancientliterature.</p>
		<p>From what we have discussed in earlier chapters, a continentdid exist in the Indian Ocean which seems to have been theplace where modern humans evolved. What we do not knowis its actual size, at various points of time, when parts of thecontinent were lost to the sea. We can only get very vagueideas by studying the present day sea depths that are indicatedin any atlas. As a first exercise, I have marked possible areaswhere Kumari continent might have existed by simply leavingout low sea depths. (See Fig. 3.1). The white areas representpossible habitable places which were shrinking periodicallyending up in the present day status.</p>
		<p>To begin with the Kumari continent would have been alarge one. The evolution of modern humans must havehappened on a fairly small area of such a large continent.Therefore, to predict where exactly evolution might have takenplace is a very difficult task. However, let us make an attemptwith the scanty evidence available to us. The most importantevidence comes from the `living fossils’. Even though Andaman- Nicobar was not part of Kumari Kandam, it must have hadaccessibility to Kumari. As the Andaman - Nicobar Islands arehill tops, it will be most natural to conclude that tribes wereliving at the foothills and as water engulfed their living area,they scrambled to the top of the hills and thus, they were totallyisolated from the main body of early humans in Kumari. Whatthis suggests is that even though the place of evolution wouldhave been a small area of Kumari around 200,000 years, thepopulation expanded sufficiently so that tribes explored new areasthat were easily accessible and settled in places like the foothillsof Andaman - Nicobar Islands. In a very similar manner,certain tribes could have reached East Africa form the Westernside of Kumari Kandam. There cannot be any doubt aboutthe presence of modern humans in East Africa (on the westernside of Kumari) and Andaman - Nicobar (Eastern side ofKumari) around 60,000 years ago. One of the importantsuggestions of the Kumari Model is the presence of fair-skinnedmodern humans, in the South Pole area described as Olinaduin Tamil literature. Therefore, around 60,000 years ago modernhumans were in atleast three extensions of Kumari Kandam,namely the Andaman islands, East Africa and the Antarcticaregion. Therefore, a reasonable suggestion would be that theevolution occured at a Central place and the population spreadto these three places during the next 150,000 years. A look atthe atlas suggests that Chagos archipalago could have been theCentral place.</p>
		<p>Having hesitatingly ventured to pinpoint a location inKumari Kandam where modern humans might have evolvedaround 200,000 years ago, let us now investigate what type ofpeople they were and how they grew up to reach the presentcultural level that we see today. From the Puranas we knowthat there were two distinct types of people. This gets scientificconfirmation when we accept that blood groups A and B belongto the two original ancestral population. Further, recent geneticstudies have revealed that the ancestral population consisted oftwo types, viz. ANIs and ASIs. From ‘living history’ we canpresume that the two ancestral population were not of the samecolour, given that one was darker and the other fairer. As ithappens, those two groups were not friendly with each otherand this probably led to physical isolation between the twoduring the very early days. As the population increased, thetwo groups spread in different directions. The fair-skinned groupseems to have drifted towards colder climates in the polar regionand the darker group established itself in the equatorial regions.Around 100,000 years, due to inter-breading, two new groupsemerged. One group was the Naga group who later migratedto East Asia and South East Asia, and the second, the browngroup which extended its presence all over the world. Thus,we had four differently coloured people which probably gaverise to the ‘Chatur varma’ division. The Naga group seem tohave lived in the coastal areas of Bay of Bengal and the darkerpeople seem to have lived mostly in South India and adjoiningareas of Kumari including Sri Lanka.</p>
		<p>From ‘WE TAMILS’ we understand that Peruvalanaduspread from Pahruli river up to the Tropic of Capricon andOlinadu spread from the Tropic of Capricon up to the AntarcticPole. If we assume that modern humans evolved near Chagosislands and it consisted of two distinct groups, it becomespossible to suggest that the darker people stayed in thePeruvalanadu area and that the fair-coloured people lived in thevast area of Olinadu. This is the time when modern humansreached the South Pole and it was the time when they observedthe polar environment and preserved the memory till thecomposition of the Rig Veda.</p>
		<p>There was a major exodus from Kumari Kandam around60,000 years ago which resulted in the growth of populationon the Eastern side of the world and immediately followingthis there were migrations to the middle East and up to presentday Turkey. The next exodus was around 40,000 years ago,when the ANIs and ASIs migrated through India towards verylarge areas up to Europe in the Western direction and East Asiain the Eastern direction. The next movement was inside KumariKandam itself when people from colder regions shifted towarmer regions as explained in the next paragraph.</p>
		<p>Sangarapillai says that around 14,000 B.C. Olinadu andPeruvalanadu become extinct. The shifting of all modernhumans to areas nearer the equator before 14,000 B.C. can beexplained because we know that was the period when the worldexperienced extremely cold conditions and probably, the humanscould not live in Olinadu any further. The period between10,000 years ago and 20,000 years ago from now could be calledthe Deva -- Asura conflict period. The major reason for theconflict was their proximity to each other and very widedivergence in their approach to life. However, there was a sortof truce for a considerable period of time during the SamudraMathana which is a marvelous allegorical description of theNeolithic Revolution. Apart from essentials such as foodproduction, animal husbandry, pot making etc there was alsodevelopment of languages, scripts and many disciplines such asmedicine, astronomy, cosmology etc. The creative period existedfor many thousands of years before the earlier bonhomiebetween the groups started waning.</p>
		<p>The migrations from Kumari Kandam occured around60,000 years ago, around 40,000 years ago, around 10,000 yearsago and around 7,000 to 8,000 years ago. Most of the migrantsseemed to have passed through the Indian super highway as mostof the genotypes in the world are seen in India only. Thishappened because when people wanted to migrate from KumariKandam, India was the most accessible point because of landconnectivity in the earlier days and proximity when KumariKandam suddenly became a series of islands.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
