<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-401">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">Aryan Invasion Theory</h1>
		<p>Whether real or imaginary, Aryan Invasion Theory (A.I.T) isstill having a dominant place in Indian history. If we opena history book from our school today, it begins with a descriptionof the Indus Valley civilization, starting with the excavationsdone in Harappa and Mohenjodaro. After giving details of whatwere found at the two places, we are told that this civilizationwent into decline and vanished around 1500 B.C. The declineis supposed to have set in because of the invasion by somenomadic tribes from Central Asia. The horse-riding, fair skinnedand blue-eyed nomads from the Steppes were supposed to haveentered India through the passes in the North West and drivenaway the native inhabitants towards the South. They alsobrought in the Sanskrit language and composed the Vedas. Inaddition, they were supposed to have enforced the caste systemwith the sole purpose of subjugating the natives. These detailsare given in text books, and also in the Encyclopedia Britannica.</p>
		<p>Actually, the two sites, Harappa and Mohenjodaro, wereexcavated by Sir John Marshall in the 1920s. His announcementof the dates of the civilization pushed India’s known historyback by about 2,000 years. In addition, when Wheeler, theBritish archeologist, discovered skeletons in Mohenjo-daro, hepropounded a theory about the massacre of locals by theinvading Aryans that put an end to the Indus Vally civilization.</p>
		<p>However, the genesis of A.I.T is not due to excavation atHarappa and Mohenjo-daro alone. Even though many Europeanvisitors had noticed the similarities between Sanskrit andEuropean languages, it was Sir William Jones, a Calcutta Judge,who established the connection between the languages knownas Indo-European (I.E) language which included Sanskrit. Thefamous statement of Jones, made on 2nd Feb 1786, triggeredthe interest of many scholars worldwide in the study of I.E.languages. A separate linguistic discipline known as “Indology”came into being and the contributions in this regard made bythe German scholar Max Müller were very significant.</p>
		<p>According to the theory propagated by Max Muller andothers, people called Aryans, who spoke an I.E. language andlived in central Asia, invaded India and overcame the nativeswho were aborigines. This is in essence was the A.I.T. basedon the beliefs existing at that time. Max Muller assigned 1500B.C. for the Aryan invasion and 1200 B.C. for the compositionof the Rig Veda. However, during the later years he was notvery rigid about the dates. Thus, A.I.T ruled the roost foralmost a century and a half.</p>
		<p>The above version of Indian history was the official versionof the British and the Indian educational authorities. ProminentIndians like Swami Vivekananda and Sri Aurobindo did notagree with this and they were sure that the Aryans were onlyIndians and the Vedas were composed by Indians only. It wasBal Gangadhar Tilak who pointed out that the astronomicalreferences in the Vedas proved that the Vedas were composedas far back as 4000 B.C. However, A.I.T got its worst beatingfrom recent archeology with the discovery of the ancientSaraswathi river mentioned in the Vedas. As the discovery ofthe Vedic Saraswathi river is the most important happening inrespect of ancient history, let us discuss this subject in somedetail.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
