<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-403">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">AGRICULTURE</h1>
		<p>The Indus - Saraswathi area described above includes a placeknown as Mehrgarh (See Fig. 4.1). Archeological excavationsat this place indicate that the place was occupied for a long timeand around 8,000 B.C., there was a sudden change from anomadic life-style to settled agriculture. Given the transformationthat took place in Jericho we had concluded that people withNeolithic knowledge arrived at the these places more or lesssimultaneously. Mehrgarh not only points to an agriculturalcommunity, it also points to the fact that there was anagricultural surplus which was a harbinger to urban civilizationsin the area. Mehgragh was occupied for a fairly long time tilla new settlement came up at a place known as Naushero, about10 KM away. Subsequently, there were at least twenty villagesthat came up in the area. These new settlements lasted till thebeginning of the Harappan cities.</p>
		<p>In her book, ‘A History of Ancient and Early MedievalIndia; From the Stone Age to the 12th Century’, Dr. UpinderSingh traces the development of the society in the Mehrgarharea from rudimentary agriculture, agricultural surplus, andorganized villages to the phase of development when multiroomed, mud-brick structures with limestone blocks asfoundation were built. She also adds that hearths for cooking,similar to modern tandoors, were found. She also gives detailsof the pottery and the terracotta objects and the various typesof industrial activity. All these go to prove that there has notonly been continuous occupation at the area but continuousadvancement of civilization till the end of the Harappacivilization.</p>
		<p>We have already proved with convincing arguments thatthere was a simultaneous migration from Kumari after the endof the last Ice age (around 8,000 B.C) towards the Middle East,North West India and East Asia by Neolithic farmers whobrought about the sudden transformation from hunter - gatheringsocieties to farming and settled societies. In the chapter coveringthe Neolithic revolution, we have established that the revolutionwould have taken place only in Kumari Kandam. There existsvast supporting evidence for the migration.</p>
		<p>Firstly, there is the genetic evidence where the markerM-172 is found in the whole of India and up to theMediterranean - a marker associated with the spread ofagriculture. The people who had the marker must have beenDravidians because of the connection of the Dravidians withthe Mediterranean. This prompted scholars to call Dravidiansas ‘people of Mediterranean sea culture’. Further, the Basquelanguage, spoken in parts of Spain, seems to be related to theDravidian languages. Further, Sumerian culture seems to havehad unmistakable links to Dravidian culture. Assuming thatHarappans were Dravidians may not be very wrong as Dravidianrelated languages are still spoken in some parts of Baluchistan.Putting all these evidence together we can say that the first waveof migrants to Mehrgarh and Jericho spoke the Dravidianlanguage and were the brown and Naga people of Kumari.</p>
		<p>From the Jordon and Fertile Cresent area they would havemigrated towards Europe. Similarly, after reaching Mehrgarh,they would have used the ancient Bolan Pass to go towardsthe West and also eastward to various areas in the Indus -Saraswathi area. Thus, we can say that the knowledge ofagriculture, animal husbandry etc. were developed in KumariKandam and brought to the Indus - Saraswathi region (startingwith Mehrgarh) by refugees from the South. This confirms themost important southern connection to the Indus - SaraswathiCivilization.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
