<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-404">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">LANGUAGE</h1>
		<p>Describing the Sanskrit language, Sir William Jones is reportedto have stated that Sanskrit is more perfect than Greek, morecopious than Latin and more exquisitely refined than either ofthese two languages. Further, no other I.E language can matchSanskrit in its literature and coverage of subjects. Instead ofaccepting the superiority of Sanskrit and its claim of being theoriginal I.E language, the Indology scholars have been searchingfor a proto - I.E. language which they have not been able tofind so far. Their effort is similar to someone in a pitch darkroom searching for a black cat that does not exist. Therefore,I am suggesting that the original I.E. language was nothing butproto - Sanskrit.</p>
		<p>We have identified where the Devas lived. Sanskrit isknown as Deva Basha, the language of the Devas. Therefore,Sanskrit should have had its origin in the Deva area of theKumari Continent. If Sanskrit came to the Saraswathiheartland, it would have been brought by the Devas who spokethe language. As it has been scientifically established that thespread of I.E. language was later to the spread of agriculture,the Devas must have migrated to the Sarswathi heartland andbeyond after the Dravidians and Nagas had establishedthemselves in the area. Living history points out that Dravidiansmigrated all over India, i.e. South India and also beyond theVindhyas, and to the Saraswathi region. The Nagas seem tohave migrated to Nepal, Bengal, North East India, and furtherEast. While the Dravidian and Naga population was spreadthinly over large areas, the Devas probably became a dominantgroup in the Saraswathi region. This is borne out by the factthat it was the Devas who were dictating terms in the regionas revealed by the significant evidence discussed elsewhere inthe book. Thus, we see that when the sea levels rose, theDravidians and the Nagas migrated first followed by the Devasmuch later and all these three groups were responsible for thesudden change towards settled life in Mehrgarh, developmentof the pre-Harappan and post Harappan civilization and theVedic civilization. Even though the Devas became the elitistgroup, they cleverly manipulated the structure of the society toabsorb the intelligentia and influential Dravidians and Nagasinto the Vedic stream, and probably established a vast politicalstructure which was democratic in nature and which was quitecapable of enforcing its writ over the vast Indus-Saraswathi area,the largest political entity of the ancient world. Therefore, thereis an unambiguous southern connection to the Indus-Saraswathicivilization as most of the people in the Indus-Saraswathi regionwere migrants from Kumari Kandam.</p>
		<p>Initially the Indus-Saraswathi Civilization had at least twodifferent languages. As Dravidian languages are still spoken insome pockets in Pakistan, it would have been in use during theearly times. Unfortunately, the final word has not been saidabout the langauge imprinted on Indus seals. Very recent highlevel research in U.S and India has indicated that it may beDravidian. Sanskrit is the language of the Vedas and there isno controversy about this fact. This means that groups whohad migrated must have been familiar with the Dravidian andAryan Languages. Dravidian language is certainly a SouthIndian language and therefore, it indicates a southernconnection. Dravidians in Kumari would have been speakingthe Dravidian language whereas the Devas would have beenspeaking in a different language. As Sanskrit is clearly identifiedas Deva Basha, they must have been speaking in a languagesimilar to Sanskrit. it is clear that the two groups of languagesco-existed. Probably the Dravidian language contributed to thedevelopment of Sanskrit because Sanskrit is a structuredlanguage which means it would have had a base language onwhich to work out the various improvements in its style. Mostprobably Tamil was the base language which helped the Devasto structure Sanskrit as a perfect language.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
