<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-405">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">VEDIC KNOWLEDGE</h1>
<p>In Tamil, they use the term ‘marai’ which means ‘hiddenmeanings’. Tamil literature refers to ‘nan-marai’ which meansfour divisions with hidden meanings. Tamil writers haveidentified ‘nan-marai’ as Thaitrium, Powdigam, Talavakaramand Samavedam. These four are not the four divisions of theVedas codified by Veda Vyasa but seems to have had earlierorigins. It is worth noting that Ravana, a southerner, was anexpert in Sama Gana and his rule was around 5,000 B.C.Therefore, it will be quite reasonable to suggest that the Vedashad their origins in the South. Here the observation of Rajaramis quite significant. According to him “Rig Veda was composedfor the most part in the Saraswathi heartland in the north. Someof its sources including much of its ancestry the poetry and thelanguage go back to a maritime civilization, in the south ofIndia and possibly beyond”.</p>
<p>According to David Frawley “Woven into the entire fabricof the Vedas, from beginning to end, is an oceanic symbolism.The Rig Veda is a product of a maritime culture that undertooktravel, trade and colonization by sea. If the Vedic people didmigrate into India, it is likely that at least some of them cameby sea or from land that bordered on the ocean”. Readers willappreciate that my conclusion in the earlier paragraphs is muchin tune with the theme suggested by David Frawley. The Kumaripeople who migrated to the Indus-Saraswathi area were veryintimately connected with the sea as their migrations werecaused by the fury of the sea. At the time when the migrationstook-place, they were staying on many islands. Naturally, theywere the people who would have first developed ways andmeans of maritime travel and also the first people who wouldhave understood the intricacies of building sea-worthy craft andalso navigation. The Dravidians were a sea-faring lot as theyhad colonized many areas in the world. Further, but for theknowledge developed by them, the later Tamil emperors couldnot have had strong navies which held sway over vast stretchesof South-East Asia. This is the reason why South India wasfamous during the Roman days for pearl diving and had a veryprosperous sea trade through Poompuhar, Musiri etc.</p>
<p>What we have established so far is very much in tune withwhat N.S. Rajaram has said in his book (Page 82) ‘SaraswathiRiver and Vedic Civilization’. He has stated “Note that theearliest human settlements in India were in coastal regions thatis to say South India. This means that the oldest Indianlanguages must also have existed in the South. Does this meanthat the Rig Vedic language and its descendants like VedicSanskrit and others originated in the South? This is a distinctpossibility, certainly a major field of research, it helps accountfor the profuse oceanic symbolism found in the Rig Veda. Butwe should be willing to consider much longer time horizons.”</p>
<p>After all the homo-sapiens (modern man) have been therefor more than 1,50,000 years and the development of languages,religion, sciences, art, and literature would have happened duringthe past 40,000 - 50,000 years at least. The glorious bloomingof human knowledge at Saraswathi would, therefore, have hadan earlier origin than is acknowledged. David Frawley in hisbook ‘the Rig Veda and the History of India’ says, “on anhistorical level, Vedic culture probably originated from SouthIndia by refugees from floods that occurred at the end of theIce-age (the Manu flood motif). They sought safety in theHimalayan foothills and eventually returned to the plains,establishing their centre at Saraswathi River that the meltingglaciers made suitable for habitation. Much of the confusionabout the Vedic India is removed when we shift the focus fromthe North West to the South”. Therefore, we can conclude thatthe Vedic ideas had been developing in Kumari for a long timewhich means that the Vedas have a Southern connection.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
