<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-406">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">CIVIL ADMINISTRATION</h1>
<p>There were skilled engineers who planned the big cities in theIndus-Saraswathi region with awesome precision. The bricksused were made in a clear ratio of 4:2:1. Similarly, weightswere standardized. According to Dick Terecy, the Harappansused a variety of plumb bobs that reveal a system of weightsbased on the decimal scale. For example, a basic Harappanplumb bob weighs 27.584 grams. If we assign the plumb boba value of 1, the other weights will have values 0.05, 1, 2.5,10; 20, 100, 200 and 500. these weights have been found insites that span a 500 year period with little change in size. Aruler made of shell, and lines drawn 6.7 mm apart with a highdegree of accuracy was found by the archeologists. Two ofthe lines are distinguished by circles and are separated by33.5mm or 1.32 inches, the distance is the so called `Indus inch’.Since the Sumerian shushi is equal to half the Indus inch, thisemphasizes the long held belief that the two civilization hadlinks. Thus, the Saraswathi civilization had a fantastic politicalsystem enforcing its writ over a very vast area. The bricks,plumb bobs and rulers unearthed in the Indus valley proclaimthe fantastic level of standardization achieved during the period.During the last 60 years of my engineering career, particularlyaeronautical engineering, I have tried my level best to achievestandardization in India with very little success. Therefore, Iam truly amazed how they evolved their standardizationorganization and enforced these decisions over such a vast areaand for such long periods of time. Therefore, I am of theopinion that this process must have started in Kumari andperfected to the highest level in Saraswathi. Another astoundingrevelation is the adoption of the decimal system more than5,000 years ago. This system definitely needed earlier groundwork to be done. All these were possible only if the IndusSarswathi civilization had an effective political set up. Therefore,it is worth investigating whether the people from Kumari couldhave contributed to the same. As explained elsewhere, the Devas(Aryans) had a political set up presided over by a person knownas Indra. This Indra was not a single person and went onchanging from time to time. Wrong doers were punished bythe court of Yama and at times excommunicated. Naturally,there would have been a developed set of rules and laws whichgoverned the society to ensure their well-being. Probably,Devaloka (the Aryan state) did not allow outsiders to enter theirterritory easily. Similarly, the Dravidian side was also wellorganized in the sense that they had a succession of Kingsknown as Pandyas. Sangarpillai has included the names of Sivaand Muruga in the early Sangam. It is worth investigatingwhether Siva and Muruga were humans who galvanized theDravidian society and built a great civilization. One authorgoes to the extents of saying that Siva was the first King ofTamils, and he introduced 64 arts and crafts including medicine.He is credited to be the first Sidha (mystic). Whatever be theveracity of these claims, it is quite certain that a system ofgovernment and administration was in vogue as early as 10,000- 15,000 years ago. Therefore, it is not improbable that theseSoutherners brought with them the idea of government whichenabled them to effectively control the affairs of the vast areaaround Saraswathi the largest pre-historic urban civilizationwhich was even bigger than Pharaonice Egypt.</p>
<p>One of the important questions frequently asked is whetherthe Indus-Sarswathi civilization was a democracy. With theknowledge gained so far, it seems it was a democracy as thereis no glorification of any individual and the total absence ofa personality cult. Further, there are no pyramids or Zigguratsor tombs. One important reason may be that the IndusSaraswathi area was jointly managed by three different groupsof people from the South and under such circumstance,democracy was probably the best choice.</p>
<p>In the final phase, the urban population lived in cities thatwere so well designed that Indians have never been able toreplicate the achievement even 5,000 years later. This statement,apart from demolishing the idea of a nomadic tribe invasion,suggests colonization by a society which had developed fantasticengineering skills. Elsewhere I have mentioned how great theNaga cities were (according to the Puranas). The Nagas andDravidians who migrated from Kumari must have workedtogether to build such a great civilization. Here it is worthdiscussing the excavations at Dholvira on the salty marshes ofRann of Kutch in Gujarat. Bisht who excavated the place says“exploring Dholavira is like opening a complete book on Indus.In Dholavira, the town planners display a surprising exuberancethat expresses itself in elaborate gateways and its roundedcolumns apart from giant reservoirs for water”. In addition,a large board with large Harappan script characters was foundwhich could be called the world’s first hoarding.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
