<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-407">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">MEDICINE, SPORTS ETC.</h1>
		<p>There was a group of mystics in the Dravidian area who, apartfrom their philosophical and religious ideas, were also originatorsof a system of medicine which is practiced even today. Thissystem is different to Ayurveda. Ayurveda could have been adevelopment of medicinal knowledge carried from Kumari toSarswathi. Similarly, ideas on astronomy, astrology and manyother sciences that germinated in the South were also transportedto Saraswathi. Talking of medicine, Western scientists haveestablished evidence of 9,000 years - old dentistry in Mehrgarh.As this period is immediately after the migration, the technologiesinvolved must have been developed much earlier in Kumari.Dentists of Mehrgarh seem to have used flint tipped drills thatrotate about 20 times a second.</p>
		<p>It was 13th January 2008, when I had just completedwriting this chapter, that I came across an interesting article<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-407-01">*</a></sup>in “The Hindu” Newscape. The report was about Jallikattu,a sport which can be called ‘bull-baiting’ or ‘bull-taming’ andsimilar to bull-fighting in Spain. The article gives a photographof an Indus seal dated 2,000 B.C. depicting bull-baiting.Therefore, it is very clear that bull-baiting was in vogue in Indusvalley more than 4,000 years ago. According to the report, theseal realistically brings alive a vigorous scene of bull-fighting. It portrays a ferocious bull in action, several men or a singleman (according to two different interpretations) thrown in theair by the bull as they try to control it. Clearly, the bull isthe victor. This seal, made of stone, is on display in theNational Museum, New Delhi.</p>
		<p>Jallikattu is very a popular sport in the Southern districtsof Tamil Nadu, particularly in Madurai district. Because ofthe fervor with which it is played, it is certainly an ancienttraditional form of sport played for the last thousands of years.There are many such traditions like the Amman worship, Murugaworhip, Marumakkhathayam etc in the Southern parts of Indiato give credence to the antiquity of such practices. Therefore,this sport is certainly one which has an ancient Dravidian originand would have been practiced in Naaval Theevu (Kumari).Naturally, the people migrating to India from Kumari wouldhave continued the same practice in Tamil Nadu as well as IndusValley where the Dravidians settled down. I am extremely happyto add this piece of information to prove that even in respectof sports, the Southern connection is evident.</p>
		<p>What makes this connection an important one is the factthat we have undisputable archeological evidence for the Southernconnection of Saraswathi civilization. In this particular case, itwas simply a matter of chance rather than the result ofdedicated research work to establish this connection. With somuch of material at our disposal, it is high time we took updedicated research of not only the Southern connection but alsothe Kumari Kandam.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
