<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-501">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">The Lokmanya’s Insight</h1>
		<p>Even though the controversy regarding the identity of the Aryanshas been going on for too long a time, there does not seemto be any consensus in sight. Many authors have contributedto the subject and it was Bal Gangadhar Tilak who didpioneering research based on the Vedas. He published his booktitled “Arctic Home in the Vedas” almost a century ago. Basedon references from the Vedas and other Sanskrit literature, andalso ancient Persian texts, he concluded that the original homeof the Aryans was the Arctic region.</p>
		<p>Let us now briefly see what B.G. Tilak found in ourancient literature. According to the Rig Veda, Indra supportsthe heavens with a pole, and moves them like a wheel. Thephenomenon of half-yearly day and half-yearly night arementioned in Surya Siddantha and older astonomical Samhitas.God’s day and night are also mentioned by Manu and referredto by Yaska. The Taittiriya Brahmana refers to the year longday and night of the Gods. According to B.G. Tilak, the detailsgiven in the ancient Parsi (Iran) literature of Vendidad, the polarcharacter is clearly explained - the sun rising and setting thereonly once a year. Further, according to him, the two ayanasmentioned in Rig Veda are the oldest divisions of the year likethe day and night of the Gods. Rig Veda also mentions aboutthe long dawns. Based on these evidence, he had suggested thatthe origin of the Aryans was in the Arctic because the sun risesand sets there only once a year.</p>
		<p>At the time when Tilak made this discovery, the Westernscholars were not very much inclined to listen to ideas comingfrom the East and his suggestion was not followed up. Moreimportantly, his suggestion did not mesh with the theories ofthe time. Unfortunately, his ideas have been lying dormant foralmost a century and it is worth looking at them afresh to findout whether they could help us in our quest. First andforemost, it is quite clear that the Vedas and other literaturementioned in the previous paragraph point only to a polar homeand not necessarily an Arctic one because the year-long day andnight occurs at both the poles, the Arctic and the Antarctic. Thismeans that there are two possibilities Antarctic or Arctic. Letus now propose that the Antarctic was the place which ismentioned in the Vedas and evaluate this proposition for itsveracity.</p>
		<p>In the previous chapter, we hesitatingly suggested thatKumari Kandam was the place where modern humans evolvedand they migrated to Africa, the Andamans and also theAntarctic polar region. It is here that Lokmanya’s insight comesto our help. He suggested the Arctic as the Aryan home. Asthe Vedic literature points to a polar home only and notnecessarily a particular one, we can modify this suggestion andtake the Antarctic as the Aryan home. This meshes perfectlywith the voluminous details given in ancient Tamil literatureabout Kumari Kandam. Adiyarkku Nallar, who wrote acommentary for the great Tamil Epic Silappadhikaram said, “Theancient people called Kumari Kandam as Navalan Theevu”.According to Mirugendra Agamam, “there were seven bigislands, the central one among them was 100,000 yojanas wide.This was called Navalan Theevu at the centre of which was theMeru Hills”. According to Vishnu Purana, one of the Manushad ten grandsons. Their father, Priyamvadhan, saw thedetached nature of three of his sons and therefore, gave theseven islands to the other seven sons. One of his sons,Agnidran got Jambudvipa which was the best of the islands.As explained earlier, Naval Theevu and Jambudvipa mean oneand the same thing. Therefore, we can conclude that MrigendraAgamam, Adiyarkku Nallar and Vishnu Purana refer to aparticular island at the centre of which was Meru Hills and thisisland was part of Kumari continent. As there is no doubtabout the location of Kumari Kandam, we can say thatJambudvipa was in the Indian Ocean.</p>
		<p>Sangara Pillai says that Kumari Kandam consisted ofPeruvalanadu and Olinadu. According to him, Peruvalanaduwas the land that stretched from Pakruliaru (Pehruli river) upto the Tropic of Capricon. He has also stated that the areathat stretched from Tropic of Capricon up to the South Polewas known as Olinadu. As Olinadu means land of light, wecan surmise that Olinadu was part of the Antarctic polarregion. Figure 5.1 illustrates the approximate areas covered byPeruvalanadu and Ollinadu.</p>
		<p>Based on the bits and pieces of information discussed sofar, let us try and construct a picture as to how the Kumaricontinent was populated during the very early days of modernhumans. Having tentatively fixed that the place where themodern humans evolved as near the Chagos archipelago, wesuggested that the population drifted in different directions asit grew in size. Out of the two ancestral groups, the ASI’s“(whom we can call Dravidians) settled down in Peruvalanadu,and the ANIs( whom we can call Devas) drifted and occupiedOlinadu. At least one group of Devas seems to have reachedthe Antarctic pole and experienced the polar seasons and arotating sky with the pole as the axis. It is this group of peoplewho not only recorded what they saw but also ensured that theirknowledge was preserved from generation to generation till itfound expression in the Vedas. The description of the polarseasons in our ancient literature points to the fact that the peoplewho later compiled the Vedas were familiar with the polarregion. Even though it is not correct, we are used to callingthe people who complied the Vedas as Aryans because it isunderstood as such by everyone. Therefore, we shall call theDevas who compiled the Vedas as Aryans. We can now affirmthat the memory of the Antarctic pole as witnessed by a groupof Devas was kept alive till it became part of the Vedas. Inconclusion we can say that the Vedic home was the Antarcticrather than the Arctic.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
