<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-501">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">THE MERU FACTOR</h1>
<p>We find that MERU is mentioned in many places - in the Hinduchant ‘Sankalpam’ or the Vedas or Sangam literature. AdiyarkkuNallar, the commentator of Silappathikaram, said that the Meruhills was at the centre of a very large island known as NavalTheevu (Jambudvipa). In our ancient Sanskrit literature, Meruis described as the axis of the Earth. The idea that Meru isthe axis of the Earth gets reinforced as our ancients recordedthat the Heaven was supported on this pole and was rotatinglike an umbrella. This also means that our ancients were verywell aware that the Earth was rotating on an axis at the pole.Tamil saints have said that the Almighty gave the Agamas inthe precincts of Meru.</p>
<p>Now we have to explore whether any information about‘Meru’ can help us in our basic quest. Its connection withJambudvipa is quite interesting as we have already suggested thatthe people who migrated into India, after the end of the lastIce age, had a sense of connection to Jambudvipa. Thissuggestion was based on the Sankalpam chanted by Hindusbefore the start of any function. Even though it is certain thatMeru is identified as the axis of the Earth, whether this meansthe Arctic or the Antarctic side of the Earth is the problem. Sowe have to probe the Meru factor further to pin-point thelocation of Jambudvipa.</p>
<p>We are fairly familiar with the Hindu temples in India.The massive and beautiful architectural wonders that they aretoday were built during the last 2,000 years. Before this,temples were probably made of the perishable materials and wedo not see them. However, religious ideas have been in placefor a very long time and the tradition of building temples, basedon a well-defined architectural plan must have evolved over avery long period of time. The sanctum sanctorum is the centralpart of the temple around which other structures are built.According to Hindu tradition, the temple is the house of Godwhere the Gods dwell on Earth. The structure where the garbhagraham (sanctum sanctorum) is located is called ‘Vimana’. Wealso know Vimana is an aircraft. In some big temples, thegarbha graha is sculptured in the form of a chariot. Accordingto Hindu belief, the Vimana is a chariot of the Gods whichcan fly to the heavenly regions in the sky. Ancient texts describethe architectural styles of various temples and these are containedin the Agamas, Vaastu Shastra etc. South Indian templearchitecture reached its peak during the period of Raja RajaChola who built the imposing Brihadishwara Temple in Tanjorewith a Vimana which is almost 200 ft in height. In essence,the Vimana in Hindu temples, around which the other structuresare built, represents the mythical Meru.</p>
<p>Around the garba graha is the circumbulatory passage todo the Pradakshna before entering God’s dwelling place.Pradakshana is done only one way, viz. in a clockwise directionaround the garba graha or the Vimana which represents Meru.The clockwise direction is accepted in all religious practices ofmany religions. The Hindus wear their sacred thread from leftto right. They wear the upper cloth also in the same fashion.It would be interesting to note similar practices in wearing theupper cloth even in pictures of the Romans.</p>
<p>Obviously the pradakshana direction is not a random choicebut probably an established practice copying somethingenormously significant. First, Meru is very much related to theDivine. People in the Polar region were used to seeing Earth’srotation around Meru. The sense of rotation is different in theArctic pole and the Antarctic pole. It is only in the Antarcticpole that the rotation they saw was left to right like thepradskshana done in temples. If they looked at the fixed sky,they would be feeling a left-to-right movement of the Earth(Pradakshna).</p>
<p>As the Pradakshana direction is based on the memory keptalive by our ancients of what their ancestors saw at the Antarticpole, Lokmanaya’s suggestion of ‘Artic home in the Vedas’becomes ‘Antarctic home in the Vedas’.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
