<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-505">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">JAMBUDVIPA CONTROVERSY</h1>
		<p>Even though I am aware of the controversy regardingJambudvipa, I did not want to discuss the same in the earlierchapters because it was essential to analyze cultural mutationsbefore discussing the Jambudvipa controversy. Now that thereaders are well aware of the cultural mutations, I would liketo discuss the subject.</p>
		<p>If we scan Tamil literature, it is quite clear that NaavalTheevu (Jambudvipa), was in the Indian Ocean and Meru Hillswas at the centre of Jambudvipa. However, when we chantthe Sankalpam it says that Jambudvipa was to the South ofMeru. Naturally, people who are familiar with the present daysorientation of South and North get confused. The Hinduencyclopedia gives the following details about Meru.</p>
		<p>“Meru (that which throws away or reflects light). Alsocalled Sumeru, this mountain is described as the axis of thewhole world. It is golden in colour and is very bright.”</p>
		<p>“It is situated in the centre of Jambudvipa and BhartaVarsha is to its South. On its top there is a flat plateau of32,000 yoganas.”</p>
		<p>“The Kedarnath Mountain in the Garhwal district ofUttaranchal is traditionally believed to be the original Meru.”</p>
		<p>“Ancient and medieval Hindu scriptures often refer to Indiaas Bharathavarsha, Bharata Kanda Jambudvipa and so on,generally the country to the south of the Himalayas and thenorth of the Indian Ocean, practically the same as modern Indiaor undivided India”.</p>
		<p>Readers can easily spot the contradictions in the abovedescription of Meru and Jambudivipa. If Meru is situated inthe centre of Jambudvipa, how can one connect Meru withKedarnath mountain at the Northern most part of India whichis considered as Jambudvipa in Hindu scriptures? Further, ifMeru is considered as the axis of the Earth, how can Kedarnathbe called the original Meru? Most importantly, modern Indiais not an island whereas Jambudvipa means an island. On thecontrary, if we consider the Antartic continent as Jambudvipawith Meru being the Antarctic Pole, the whole area ofJambudvipa is to the South of Meru provided we invoke theinferred mutation regarding the North - South direction.</p>
		<p>In an earlier section, we introduced the idea of an inferredmutation concerning the orientation of North - South. We wereable to justify the mutation by the fact that we are able to givean acceptable meaning to many unbelievable concepts such asHeaven above our heads and Hell down below. In subsequentparas we shall get additional support for the inferred mutation.</p>
		<p>If we scan the Tamil literature on the subject, there is noambiguity about the location of Kumari Kandam in the IndianOcean. There were two major rivers in the Kumar continent- Kumari nearer India and Pahruli farther away from Indiaimplying that the Pahruli river was between the Kumari riverand Antarctic pole. There was a city known as Madurai onthe banks of Pahruli where the first Sangam was held. Thesecond Sangam was held in Kapatapuram on Kumari River.When Kapatapuram also vanished, the third Sangam was heldin the present day Madurai, Tamil Nadu. Many modern Tamilwriters refer to present day Madurai as North Madurai and theMadurai that was on Pahurli, where the primal Sangam washeld, as South Madurai, as per the present day understandingof North-South direction.</p>
		<p>But, to my surprise, I saw a different version in a Tamilbook titled “Tamil Vedas”, authored by Durban K.Ramaswamy. The author, a Tamilian settled in South Africa,wrote the book about 50 years ago. The author seems to beconversant with ancient Tamil literature and probably not usedto later corrections. He refers to Madurai that was on the banksof Pahruli as North Madurai and the Madurai in Tamil Naduas South Madurai. First I though that the anomaly was dueto the printer’s devil but after reading the whole book I cameto the conclusion that the author meant what he wrote and therewas no ambiguity about it. In the preface, the publishers ofthe book have claimed that the author was able to show prooffor whatever he had stated which means that he had probablypicked up the orientation of the two Madurais from ancientTamil literature. Unfortunately, I have not been able toauthenticate the same independently. Assuming that the authoris correct, it gives additional support to the idea about thecultural mutation pertaining to North-South direction which canexplain the statement in the Hindu chant Sankalpam thatJambudvipa was to the South of Meru.</p>
		<p>Readers are already aware of the cultural mutationsinvolving North-South direction. So before the mutationoccurred, Meru (at the centre of Antarctic) was the Northern- most point and naturally, Bharata Varsha, Bharata Kanda etc.were to its South as mentioned in the Sankalpam. Now weshall look for additional evidence to prove our point.</p>
		<p>According to the Encyclopedia, Mahendra mountain wasin undivided India. Therefore, probing the location ofMahendra, as per the old legends, may help us to reinforce ouridea that Jambudvipa was in the Indian Ocean. In Tamilliterature, there is no ambiguity about the location of Mahendramountain. Adiyarku Nallar states that Meru and Mahendraexisted in Kumari Kandam. Also, according to many otherTamil writers, the abode of Lord Siva was Mahendra mountainsituated in Kumari.</p>
		<p>As Parasurama, one of the avatars of Vishnu, is connectedwith Mahendra mountain let us briefly go through his story andfind out whether his connection with Mahendra reveals anyuseful clue. Parasurama was the fifth son of the great BriguSage Jamadagni and Renuka Devi. One day, Renuka Devicommits a fleeting sin which could be called mental adultery.She committed the sin when she happened to see a veryhandsome Gandharva and admired him but she corrected herselfin no time. However, this fleeting sin of hers tormented herand her husband came to known the sin committed by her. Hewas furious and ordered his sons to behead their mother whichthey ignored. At this time, Parasurama was not in the Ashram.Jamadagni got angry with his sons who did not obey him andcursed them to become animals. When Parasurama returnedto the Ashram, his father asked him to kill his mother and thebrothers. He obeyed the orders of his father instantly. TheRishi was very pleased and asked his obedient son to ask forwhatever he wanted. Parasurama, knowing the power of hisfather, asked him to restore to life his mother and brotherswhom he had killed. The Rishi obliged and those who werekilled got up as though from sleep.</p>
		<p>Kartha Veeryarjuna was a very powerful king. He oncewent to the Ashram of Jamadagni and he enjoyed thehospitality of the great Sage. Unfortunately, he wanted the cowsthat were in the Ashram and took away all of them withoutpermission. This infuriated Parasurama and he killed the King.The King’s sons got enraged at the killing of their father andvowed revenge. They severed the head of Sage Jamadagni whenhe was in a yogic pose. Naturally, this infuriated Parasuramawho took a terrible and historic decision to destroy all the Kingsin the world. Afterwards he killed many arrogant Kingswithout mercy. Thus, he gained control of all the land whichhe gave to Sage Kashyapa. Kashyapa accepts the gift with aspecific condition that Parasurama should retire to the SouthWestern part of the land and live there. Accordingly, he wentSouth and settled down at Mahendra mountain on the Westernside.</p>
		<p>The story of Lord Rama is known to everyone. WhereasParasurama was the 6th Avatar of Lord Vishnu, DasarathaRama was the 7th Avatar. The return of Rama after fulfillinghis commitment to Sage Vishwamithra is well known. AtMithila, Rama broke the Shiva Dhanush which was in thecustody of King Janaka. Rama then married Sita Devi, thedaughter of King Janaka.</p>
		<p>Parasurama was in possession of the Vishnu Dhanush andthe news of the breaking of Shiva’s bow by Rama rekindledhis anger against the kshatriyas. He knew that only Vishnuand someone born with his power could wield the greatweapon. Therefore, he decided to challenge Rama to wield theVishnu Dhanush and shoot an arrow. Parasurama was stupefiedwhen Rama stringed the divine bow and placed an arrow init. Once an arrow was fixed, it could target anything.Therefore, with Parasuram’s concurrence, Ram released the arrowat the punya earned by Parasurama and destroyed them. Thus,Parasurama lost all his powers and afterwards he confinedhimself to performing tapasya on Mahendra mountain.</p>
		<p>According to tradition, the Mahendra mountains werelocated in the sub-continent. However, they were certainly apart of Kumari Kandam as can be seen from the story ofParasurama. After Parasurama hands over all the landconquered by him to Sage Kashyapa, the Sage wanted to ensurethat the powerful Parasurama went somewhere else other thanthe land which he had given up. Therefore, he requestedPrasurama to go to the South West of India which is certainlythe present day West coast of South India. In oral tradition,that I have heard, Parasurama was supposed to have come toKerala, thrown his axe into the sea and reclaimed the land asfar as his axe could go. Secondly, it is clearly mentioned thatParasurama spent his last days in Mahendra mountain. Evenif we refer to his duel with Rama, he is reported to have retiredto Mahendra after his defeat. Besides, Kerala was also knownas Parasurama Kshetra. Therefore, there is no doubt thatMahendra was near the present day Western coast of SouthIndia.</p>
		<p>From the Parasurama story, we get confirmation thatMahendra mountain was beyond the South West coast of India.This suggests that Mahendra should have been part of theChagos-Laccadives range. According to the Hindu Encylopedia,Mahendra was one of the seven mountains marking theboundary of Jambudvipa endorsing Adiyarkku Nallar’s statementthat Mahendra hills existed in Kumari Kandam. All these pointclearly to the fact that Jambudvipa was in the Indian Oceanand that the controversy had arisen because of the mutationsconcerning directions.</p>
		<p>Meru is that which throws away or reflects light. Ourancients have described Meru as the axis of the whole worldand they also said that it was very bright. If Meru is the axisof the world it should be at the north or the south pole. It isa scientific fact that at both poles we have bright columns oflights extending to more than 300 kilometers in height. Theyare known as Aurora Borealis (northern lights) and AuroraAustralis (southern lights). These columns of lights are seen atthe magnetic poles which are near the geographic poles.</p>
		<p>Regarding Jambudvipa, it is described as a very large island.As Meru is supposed to be at the centre of Jambudvipa andMeru may be at either poles, Jambudvipa could be either theArctic pole or the Antarctic pole. From the geography of theworld as seen today it is clear that Arctic is only a sea andit is Antarctica which is an island. Antarctica as we see todayis a huge continent bigger than the continent of Europe. Itshould have been much bigger some 50,000 years ago.Therefore modern scientific knowledge has come to our rescueto confirm that Jambudvipa is nothing but the Antarcticcontinent (which was much bigger) with one of the Merus atits centre.</p>
		<p>Everything described about Meru by our ancients isabsolutely correct. Its light could be seen, even today at far offplaces such as New Zealand Tasmania. Eventhough Meru isonly a light display of gigantic proportions caused by collisionof charged particles with atoms at high altitudes and controlledby earths magnetic field, our ancients mistook it for a brightmountain. They even thought that is was the abode of Godsand probably never ventured to go anywhere near.</p>
		<p>Our ancients called Aurora Borealis as Sumeru. AuroraAustarlis was called as Kumeru, meaning it was Meru inKumari. It is Kumeru which was at the centre of Jambudvipa.(Antarctic continent), confirming the description of Naval Theevuin the Kumari continent described in ancient Tamil literature.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
