<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-506">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">DRINKING HABITS OF OUR ANCIENTS</h1>
		<p>The mutation pertaining to the meaning of the word “Asura”enabled us to visualize what happened in the Saraswathiheartland after the migration of Aryans from Kumari around8,000 years ago. Therefore, if we probe the subject deeper, itmay reveal more details about our ancestors.</p>
		<p>It is said that the Devas accepted Sura and the other grouprejected it earning the name Asura. We have explainedelsewhere that the three groups of people took specific lines ofactivity during the Neolithic Revolution and that the Devas weremore concerned about inventing new products such as weapons(Saranga), Sura (alcoholic drink) etc. Their first reaction to“Sura” would have been very different to what we attribute todrinks today. They were exposed to it for the first time andthe only thing they experienced was probably an exhilaratingfeeling. Probably, they attached some supernatural attributes toit and they not only liked it but felt that it was something thattasted great. When the Devas offered it to the Asuras, the latterwould have looked at it with quite a bit of suspicion. Theymight have even thought that it was a trick by the Devas topoison them and naturally they rejected the same.</p>
		<p>The Devas were probably happy that the Asuras rejectedthe marvelous stuff they had invented. They continued theirwork and they also developed Soma, another drink. WhereasSura is obtained from grains, Soma is derived from a creeper.Ultimately, Soma preparation and drinking became a ritualamong the Vedic People. We know that the Asuras, like thePersians, decried the Soma drinking tribes. In modern timesalso there are people who make fun of the Vedic Soma rituals.</p>
		<p>We must realize that the drinking ritual is still with us andwe have not given it up. As an Air Force Officer, I was usedto “Dining-in Nights” during my training days when officersstand up and drink a toast to the President. The drink usedwas normally red wine or sherry. I saw this in a big way inRussia. Even after the routine dinners we had with Russians,toasts were offered many number of times and each time onegulped down a small cup of Vodka along with some softdrink. We also know that when dignitaries from one countryvisit another country, toasts are offered. These are certainlydrinking rituals which are still with us though in a differentform.</p>
		<p>A Puranic story concerning Sage Agasthya gives us someinteresting insight into the food and drinking habits of ourancestors. Agasthya is one of the most famous Sages or seersof the Vedic period. He is the seer of several Rigvedic mantras.Agasthya is also connected with Tamil, being the author of thefirst treatise on Tamil grammar. He is also credited with theauthorship of many works connected with medicine andmysticism. There is a story in which Sage Agasthya destroystwo Rakshasa brothers, Illvala and Vatapi. The duo used toinvite people for a feast but cunningly they used to have theguest for their dinner. Once Agasthya was invited by the duobut the Sage understood their bad intensions in time anddestroyed them. However, this incident troubled the Sage whosaw the cause for the bad incident as his meat-eating habit. Heseems to be the first person to have put a taboo to meat-eatingand also drinking, especially for the Brahmins. Naturally thisbecomes an important mutation in the history of modern humanswhich resulted in a sizeable population becoming vegetariansand also the non-drinking group of humans.</p>
		<p>The story gives the clear cut historical fact that all humanswere of the meat-eating type up to the Vedic period. Inaddition there was the drinking habits of the Suras. Agasthyais mentioned in the Ramayana and we can approximately fixhis period pertaining to the above story around 7,000 years ago.The Neolithic Revolution took place around 10,000 years agoand the Suras were the drinking type of humans from then on.The main wave of migration consisting of Aryans probably tookplace around 8,000 years ago. During this migration, a majorgroup of Aryans went beyond India into Siberia, Central Asia,and Europe etc. This group got completely isolated from theAryans who settled down in the Saraswathi heartland and theprohibition that was enforced by Agasthya did not affect them.Thus, they have been the drinking type of humans for almost10,000 years. However, the net result was partial prohibitionwas enforced in the sub-continent whereas no such restrictionwas imposed on the Aryan population who settled outside thesub-continent.</p>
		<p>In today’s scenario, it has been established that “orientalpeople are less tolerant of alcohol than Caucasians”.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-506-01">*</a></sup> This isprobably due to the fact that the Suras (Caucasians) have beenthe drinking type for a longer period than the Asuras (Orientals).Therefore, we can claim to have scientific proof that there werethe Suras and the Asuras (drinking types and non-drinking types)which indirectly confirms all that we have said about Kumari,Samadura Mathana etc.</p>
		<p>I was very happy when I got authentic support for theabove story on the drinking habits of our ancient people fromthe Hindu Encyclopedia which says “Hindu Scriptures havealways condemned Surapana or madhyapana and consumingof intoxicating drinks as Mahapathaka or a grave sin (videChandogya Upanishad 5.10.9 Mansmrithi.11.54. ApasthambaDharmasutras 1.7.21.8) Sura is the intoxicating drink preparedout of flour. (It should not be confused with the Soma juice).Other drinks like the one prepared out of molasses or madhukaflowers were permitted to be taken by the Kshatriyas and Vysyas.But the Brahmins were strictly forbidden from consuming alltypes of intoxicants.”</p>
		<p>It is interesting to note that Sura was one of the oblationsmade in the Sautramani sacrifice. As Sura was used as anoblation in a sacrifice, it probably had an acceptable place tobegin with. However, with experience, seeing its negative aspects,it might have been banned at a later stage. It is also clear thattotal prohibition was enforced on the Brahmins only and otherswere probably allowed to drink wisely.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
