<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-507">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">DEVAS AND GODS</h1>
		<p>The people who lived near the Polar region were also ordinaryhumans like those who lived in places away from the Polarregion. In our ancient literature, the people who lived nearthe Pole were called gods. Why they were called gods is anintriguing question. There is a Tamil proverb which says “ina land of dumb people a blabberer is considered as a greatorator.” What this means is that peoples who do not have aparticular talent, or who cannot acquire the same, consider aperson with that particular talent as a star or a superstar. Thatis how we have superstars in music or movies or sports. It isthis attitude of humans which creates a separate class of peoplewho are adored. For instance, a Swami who can give fluentlectures on religious scriptures, or a Swami who can materializethings out of nothing is usually placed much above the normalhuman level and very near the Godly zone. This is what musthave happened during the very early Kumari days. Probably,the Polar humans exhibited some talent which others did nothave. It could have been such a simple things as the abilityto count or add numbers which the other person could not do.Or it could be that one group had many resources which madethem richer as compared with others which was another reasonwhy they were called Devas or Gods. Other examples arepowerful monarchs or high priests who ascribed Godliness tothemselves because of their superior position. During myyounger days in my village, most of the villagers used to callmy father Saami (Sanskrit version being Swamy) and they usedto call me Chinna Saami. In Tamil ‘Saami’ is God and thesame word was used to describe a person of higher caste orstatus. Whatever be the reason, the Devas or the Aryans wholived near the Polar region were called Gods.</p>
		<p>In the dry desert region of Tarim Basin, Chinesearcheologists discovered well preserved mummies of an ancientrace of people. They had blue eyes and blond hair and so, fromthe observed facts, one can easily conclude that some Nordicpeople might have reached the Tarim basin around 2000 B.C.which was the carbon date of the remains. Such type of peoplewere supposed to have lived in Bactria and even today, suchpeople are living in Kashmir and Afghanistan. Fortunately, theirlanguage gives additional clues to unravel the mystery. Thelanguage spoken by them was known as Tocharian which isan I.E. language. Writings in this language, written in an Indianscript, were found in China and the Indian script was Brahmi.Therefore, the language and the script seem to have an Indianconnection. Further, as such people are living in Kashmir andAfghanistan, it is also likely that they reached those places likeall other Kumari migrants. According to David Frawley, suchpeople were honoured as highly advanced and spiritual. Healso suggests that Tarim Basin where they lived was later knownas the land of Uttar Kurus and as the land of Gods.Therefore, knowing that the Devas, who lived in the Antarcticregions, were considered as Gods, we can connect the two piecesof information and suggest that the Tocharians were Devaswhom we are currently talking about and they migrated fromSaraswathi heartland around 4,000 years ago. Therefore, it isnow possible to propose that the Tocharians were the so calledDevas from Kumari who settled in the Saraswathi area and gotexposed to the I.E. languages before they migrated to TarimBasin in China.</p>
		<p>Similar to the Tocharians, there is another group of peopleknown as ‘Saami’. These people are now living in Sweden,Norway, Finland and Kola Peninsula of Russia. They havetheir own language known as ‘Saami’. Their livelihood dependson reindeer herding, fur trapping and coastal fishing. They arebelieved to be living in the Nordic countries for at least 5000years. The original religion of Saami people seems to beShamanic. At present their total population is at least 100,000and the majority of them live in Norway. We have to go backto what we have discussed earlier about people in Tamil Naducalling certain people as Saami. As Saami in Tamil means God,they probably lived in the Antarctic region. They probablymigrated much before the full blossoming of the I.E. languageand they seem to be having more of Dravidian traits as theirreligion was Shamanic.</p>
		<p>From the foregoing discussion, we get another piece ofinformation. The Saamis and the Tocharians were used to thePolar climate and therefore they sought cold regions like Nordiccountries or Tarim Basic etc to settle down. I also understandthat there is genetic connection between the people in Estoniaetc. and a particular group of people in South India. This maymean that the migrations were from Kumari and generally themigrants trekked too far so as to settle down in a very coolplace.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
