<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-606">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">SARASWATHI WAVE MIGRATION OF CELTS AND OTHERS</h1>
		<p>We have already discussed the occupation of the Indus -Saraswathi area by early migrants connected with agriculturalexpansion and later by the Devas from Kumari. Together theyestablished the greatest civilization of the time which gave tothe world languages and many branches of knowledge. Thesuccess of the migrants could be attributed to the life-giving riverSaraswathi. Around 3000 B.C., Saraswathi started drying upand the people of the Saraswathi heartland, who have been partof the fantastic cultural progress for thousands of years, had toseek new homes. In the following paragraphs, we shall brieflydiscuss such migrations.</p>
		<p>The genetic data from the present day population of theBasques and the Celts living in Western Europe open up a widewindow to understand the settlements of modern humans inEurope. Basques lived in Northern Spain and South WestFrance. They speak a language which seems to be an ancientone. Even though it is not true of all Basques, some of themhave been marrying within their ethnic group which helped themto maintain a distinct identity. Similarly, the Celts have beenliving in France and British Isles, and they also kept up theirindependent identity in the outlying parts of Ireland and France.Y-marker M-173 is a common marker found in Western Europe.This marker is about 30,000 years old and it is present at ahigher frequency among the Basques and the Celts whencompared with the other Europeans. Other major Y-lineagespresent in Europe are younger than M-173 implying that M173 might have arrived in Europe earlier than others. Basedon the above genetic information, one may probably concludethat the Basques and the Celt settled down in Europe long beforeothers and probably both of them arrived in Europe more orless at the same time. As I have been repeatedly saying,conclusions arrived at based on a single type of evidence hasto be validated by other means before final acceptance. Thestory is not that simple as to conclude that the Basques andthe Celts were very early settlers in Europe because there aremany cultural aspects of the Celts and the Basques which clearlyindicate that they arrived in Europe at different time periodsseparated by many thousand of years. Firstly, unlike theBasques, whose language seems to be an ancient one, thelanguage of the Celts belongs to the I.E. group which puts theage of this Celtic language to less than 7,000 years from now.</p>
		<p>The Story of the Celts strongly suggests an Indian originas they considered themselves children of Danu. The Celts arereported to have called themselves as “Tuatha De Danaan” orthe children of Danu. The names of European rivers such asDanube, Dnieper, Don etc are congnate with Danu. TheDanube was the Celts most important river which was alsoconnected with Scythians. The Danus were sea people (2800B.C) who threatened Egypt in the later part of the secondmillennium B.C. Druids who were the priests of Celts, seemto have had a similar position in society like the Brahminsamong Hindus.</p>
		<p>According to the Puranas, Danavas were the children ofRishi Kashyapa through Danu, one of his wives. It has beensuggested that Kashmir and Caspian Sea are named after thisgreat Rishi. In Celtic lore, the cow is associated with themother Goddess Danu. All the above details lead us to believethat Celts were the Danavas mentioned in our Puranas. DavidFrawley says Nahusha and Dushyantha were considered asDanavas. Maya, the great architect of the Vedic people wasanother Danava suggesting that the Maya civilization is connectedto him and also the Vikings.</p>
		<p>Now let us see how the West views the Celts. The Celtswere a member of an early Indo-European group of people whosettled down over much of Europe from the second millenniumB.C to the first century B.C. At one time, they were seen inmany parts of Western Europe such as the British Isles wheretheir language is still surviving in the outlying areas and theHighlands of Scotland, the Isle of Mann and Brittany.Information about Celts is available from ancient Irish literature.Celts were organised loosely as tribes which had a chief, nobles,freeman and slaves. They usually lived in fortified villages oftenbuilt on hill tops. Celtic priests were called Druids. LikeHindus, the Druids thought that the soul was immortal. Theywere also magicians and astrologers.</p>
		<p>From the information available about Celts, we can say thatCelts reached Western Europe after 3000 B.C. From theircultural aspects it is possible to conclude that they had anintimate connection with the Vedic people of the Saraswathiheartland from where they probably migrated to Europe around3000 B.C. We know fairly well that it was around 3,000 B.C.that the Saraswathi river started declining and this would havebeen the main reason why they migrated.</p>
		<p>Now coming back to the Basques, let us take into accountthe views of Lahavory seriously and accept that there are manysimilarities between the Basques and the Dravidians. Further,the Tamils have been consistently resisting to accept Sanskrit,and I.E. language. The Basques too have been resisting theadoption of I.E. language. Both of them have been adamantabout retaining their identity at all costs. So, we can tentativelysuggest that the Basques were the Dravidian speaking people ofKumari who migrated to Western Europe around 30,000 yearsago. The clue for such a proposal comes from the spread ofthe Y-marker M-45 around 30,000 years ago as discussed earlier.</p>
		<p>M-173 belongs to the M-45 lineage which moved fromKumari to Central Asia, Eastern Europe etc following the pathalong the Western coast of India up to the North Westerncorridors of India and beyond. It is quite possible that M-173arose in India and one group with M-173 moved to CentralAsia and probably Western Europe around 30,000 years ago.Probably, the Basques may belong to this group. Being a veryancient people, they probably resisted mingling with others andcontinued to live in isolation. If this proposition has to beconfirmed, it is necessary to study the connection betweenBasque and the most ancient Dravidian language.</p>
		<p>The discussion about the Basques and the Celts has beena rewarding one in that we can see that a multi-disciplinaryapproach yields much better results. In a similar manner, letus now discuss the various migrations to Europe. The first onewas that of Cro-Magnons and Basques around 30,000 years ago.This is connected with the spread of ANIs through the Indiaafter 40,000 years ago and markers M-45 and M-173 were partof the main wave of migration. This obliviously means thatpart of M-45/M-173 group remained in Kumari/India after themain wave of migration and it is this group which migratedtowards Europe much later around 8,000-7,000 years ago as partof the IE wave. This group had developed another marker M17 which arose in Kumari/India from M-173. Naturally theassociated marker with I.E. migration was M-17 which is foundin India, Central Asia, Eastern Europe etc. The Saraswathiheartland was occupied by a dominant group of M-17 peoplewho were responsible for the fantastic development of theSanskrit language and the associated knowledge streams.</p>
		<p>Around 3000 B.C. the Saraswathi river started drying upand there was another exodus of I.E people. However, thistime it was only from the Saraswathi heartland and not fromKumari. Celts, Scythinians etc. were the people who probablymigrated from Saraswathi and they occupied parts of middleEast and Europe as explained in the next section. Theirlanguage was I.E related and their religion mostly Devic. Theabove discussion leads us to believe that people with M-17 wentto Europe in two waves. The first wave was around 6,000 B.Cas part of the I.E. Wave and the later one was between 3,000B.C and 2,000 B.C. as part of the Saraswathi wave caused bythe drying up of the Saraswathi river. The first group as wellas the second group had M-17 marker, but the second one hadan additional marker M-323. Even though both groups hadM-17, the former is identified as haplogroup R1a and later asR1b. R1a is in India, Central Asia etc. and R1b mostly inWestern Europe.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
