<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-607">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">OTHER MIGRATIONS</h1>
		<p>Apart from the Basques and the Celts, many other groups ofpeople have left historical traces of their migrations in a vastarea covering from Iran to Ireland including many areas in theMiddle East. They are</p>
		<p>(1) Sumerians</p>
		<p>(2) Samies</p>
		<p>(3) Persians</p>
		<p>(4) Assyrians</p>
		<p>(5) Scythians</p>
		<p>(6) Tocharians</p>
		<p>(7) Mittanies</p>
		<p>(8) Hittites</p>
		<p>(9) Kassites</p>
		<p>While discussing the Neolithic migration which occurredaround 10,000 years ago, we have established the Dravidianconnection with the Summerian civilization. This meant thatSumerians were Dravidian speaking people and they were notexposed to Vedic ideas. Their main area of activity was in theFertile crescent from where neolithic ideas spread to other places.They built one of the greatest civilizations of the ancient worldsimilar to the one in Egypt. Their civilization lasted up toatleast 3000 B.C.</p>
		<p>The Samies were also early migrants not affected by theVedic civilization. Their religion was Shamanic and theirlanguage was an ancient one. They seem to have preferred verycold regions in the North as we can still see them in Norway,Sweden and adjoining areas.</p>
		<p>Whereas the Sumerians and Saamies migrated from KumariKandam as part of the Neolithic Wave, the Persians seem tohave migrated as part of the I.E. Wave. From their literature,we learn that they were part of the Vedic stream at the timeof migration but developed their ideas in a manner significantlydifferent to that of the Aryan group which settled in the Indiansub-continent. The close relationship between the two groupsof people is established because both the groups have the Ymarker M-17 in them. Upto a level, their religious practiceswere similar because both of them were fire worshippers. Moreimportantly, their languages fall within the I.E. group.</p>
		<p>The significant difference between them was that thePersians referred to divine as Ahura (Asura) and undivine asDaeva (Deva). However, the Vedic people who settled on theIndian sub-continent referred to the Devas as divine and Asuraas undivine. In Chapter 5 we have discussed ‘Cultural mutations’and one of the important mutation is about change of meaningof Asura from divine to undivine. Parsi literature after allreinforces our ideas about the cultural mutation that took placeamong the vedic people who wanted to deprive the Asuras oftheir position in society.</p>
		<p>It is interesting to note that the Persians called their placeof origin as a land of snow and cold. This indicates that theycould have lived in the colder regions of Kumari Kandamalong with the Vedic Aryans before they were forced to migratearound 6000 years ago. Apart from this, we can find nuggetsof historical tit bits about other groups in the Parsi literature.They called the people who settled in areas beyond Tigris andEuphrates as serpent people, the followers of AZI DAHAKA.Earlier, we had indicated that the Neolithic migrants consistedof the Dravidians and the Nagas. Therefore, we can speculatethat the group that migrated to the Northern shores of theMediterranean were the Dravidians confirming what the classicalauthors have said on this issue. They called the Dravidians aspeople of ‘Mediterranean sea culture’. On the other hand, theNagas seem to have migrated to the southern side starting fromArabia and Middle East up to Egypt and Senegal. Elsewherein this book, I have suggested that it is most probable that thoseNagas were the originators and followers of semitic religions.</p>
		<p>Just like the Persians, the Assyrians worshipped God Ashur(Asura) which was also the name of their main city and oftheir country. Assyria was located North West of Mesopotamia.Assyrians were considered as fierce warriors. From the fact thatthe Assyrian God was also Asura, it is reasonable to speculatethat they probably migrated from Kumari Kandam at the sametime as the Persians.</p>
		<p>David Frawley in his book ‘The Rig Veda and the Historyof India’ gives interesting particulars about Scythians which areas follows. “The Seythians were a powerful people speakingan Iranian language and active throughout West Asia andEurope. They were generally inimical to the Persians and hada more iconic form of religion. They worshipped the SunGod, and many Gods and Goddesses and had a Soma cult.The Persians saw them as the Soma drinking Aryas who wereamong their main enemies. The Scythians attacked Babyloniaand Assyria in the eight century BC and so they appear in thehistory of the west about the same time as the Persians. Eventhe ancient Celts claimed to have come from Scythians. TheIrish remember a time when Scythians made it to Ireland.”</p>
		<p>Scythian kings were prominent in West India up to the earlycenturies of CE (Christian Era) extending their rule into Sindhand Gujarat.</p>
		<p>We also get interesting tit bits about Scythias from theinternet. The first to describe the life style of Scythian tribeswas a Greek historian called Herodotus who lived in fifthcentury BC. He identified certain tribes living in Central Asiaand up to Mongolia as ‘Sacea’ which was another name forSeythians. He gives a detailed description of their way of lifeand he identified many tribes as Scythians.</p>
		<p>A gentleman from Michigan calls himself ‘Scythian’.According to him, the Scythian race is well and alive, and theRajputs and the Jats of India are Scythians.</p>
		<p>From the available pieces of information, we can say thatto begin with they were close neighbours of the Iranians as theyspoke an I.E. language closer to Iranian. We can say that theyalso migrated from Kumari as part of the I.E. Wave and settledin areas between Iran and the sub-continent. As they werehated by the Persians and described by them as ‘Soma drinkingmarauding Aryas’, they were not having the Asura leanings likethe Persians. They were probably closer to the Vedic peoplein religion but also Shamanic indicating that they still adheredto the practices they were used to before migrating fromKumari. We can also make out that they were the early tribesto be designated as Kshtriyas because they continued with theirwarrior-like attitudes even after leaving the Indus-Saraswathi areaaround 3000 BC. They seem to have wandered all over fromIran to Ireland retaining their aggressive attitude.</p>
		<p>The Tocharians were an I.E people who were blond redhaired ethnic types. David Frawley has suggested the possibilityof such ethnic groups living in ancient Afganistan, Central Asiaand even in Kashmir where we find a few of these types eventoday. The Tarim Basin of China, where they lived up to thefirst millennium AD, was regarded as the land of the UttaraKurus and as a land of the Gods, (David Frawley) We haveidentified such fair coloured people living in very cold regions of Kumari as the Devas or Gods even though they were ordinaryhuman beings. Therefore, we can suggest that such people leftKumari during the I.E. wave and settled in the outlying areasof the Indus-Saraswathi regions (Kashmir and beyond) and wereexposed to the development of I.E. language during the earlydays when the Saraswathi river started declining due to severedrought around 3000 B.C they must have migrated further Northand finally settled down in the Tarim Basin.</p>
		<p>According to David Frawley, the Hittites dominated the areanear Antolia from 2200 B.C. conquering even the Assyrians andending up during the early centuries of first millennium B.C.The Mittani dominated the region of Syria during a major partof the 2nd millennium B.C. During the same time, the Kessitesdominated Babylonia. They were worshippers of Indra, Mitra,Varuna and Surya. Their language was closer to Vedic ratherthan the Iranian language. Therefore, it would to be quitereasonable to speculate that they were Arya elites who ruledover the non-aryas who had migrated to those areas muchearlier.</p>
		<p>The details of westward migrations discussed in this sectionare from sources such as books by David Frawely. Apart fromthose migrations, the majority of population started driftingtowards many parts of India such as The Gangetic Plains,Eastern India and South India. After Saraswathi River vanished,the composite culture of Indus - Saraswathi Civilization spreadthroughout India, the Vedic stream having a dominant role.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
