<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>ARYANS Who Are They?</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-608">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">BIBLIOGRAPHY (Books in English)</h1>
		<p><strong>1. ARCTIC HOME IN THE VEDAS</strong></p>
		<p>By Lokmanya Bal Gangadhar Tilak,<br />Published by Messers Tilak Bros., # 568,<br />Narayan Peth, Gaikwar Wadu, Kikkar Road,<br />Pune 411 030.</p>
		<p><strong>2. WE TAMILS</strong></p>
		<p>By P. Sangarapillai<br />Published by Dr. S. Manoharan,<br /># 840, S. Wild Flower Lane,<br />Anaheim, CA 92808, USA.</p>
		<p><strong>3. LOST DISCOVERIES</strong></p>
		<p>By Dick Teresi<br />Simon and Schuster, 1230, Avenue of the Americas<br />New York, NY 10020.</p>
		<p><strong>4. VEDIC ARYANS AND THE ORIGINS OF CIVILISATIONS</strong></p>
		<p>By Navaratna S. Rajaram and David Frawley and<br />Published by Voice of India, 2/18 Ansari Road,<br />New Delhi 110 002.</p>
		<p><strong>5. Ancient India in A New Light</strong></p>
		<p>by K.D. Sethna<br />Aditya Prakasan, F 14/65, Model Town II, Delhi - 1100 052.</p>
		<p><strong>6. The Rig Veda and the History of India</strong></p>
		<p>by David Frawley Aditya Prakasan</p>
		<p><strong>7. The RIG VEDA - A Historical Analysis</strong></p>
		<p>by Srikant G. Talageri, Aditya Prakasan.</p>
		<p><strong>8. Aryan Invasian Theory– A Reappraisal</strong></p>
		<p>by Srikant Talageri<br />Aditya Prakashan.</p>
		<p><strong>9. The Myth of the Aryan Invasion of India</strong></p>
		<p>by David Frawley<br />Published by Voice of India, 2/18, Ansari Road,<br />New Delhi - 110 032.</p>
		<p><strong>10. Genes, Peoples and Languages</strong></p>
		<p>By Luigi Luca Cavalli - Sforza<br /> Published by University of California Press<br />Berkeley and Los Angeles, California.</p>
		<p><strong>11. The Journey of Man</strong></p>
		<p>by Spencer Wells<br />- Random House Trade Paper back, New York.</p>
		<p><strong>12. Vedic Glossary on Indus Seals</strong></p>
		<p>by Dr. N. Jha<br />Published by Ganga Kaveri Publishing House<br />D 35/77, Jangamawadimath, Varanasi - 221 001.</p>
		<p><strong>13. Saraswathi River and the Vedic Civilisation</strong></p>
		<p>by N.S. Rajaram<br />Published by Aditya Prakashan, New Delhi.</p>
		<p><strong>14. DNA - the Secret of Life</strong></p>
		<p>by James D. Watson<br />Published by Arrow Books</p>
		<p><strong>15. The problem of Aryan Origins</strong></p>
		<p>by K.D. Sethna<br />Published by Adithya Prakashn, New Delhi.</p>
		<p><strong>16. Hidden Horizons</strong></p>
		<p>by Dr. David Frawley and Dr. N.S. Rajaram<br />Published by Swaminarayan Aksharpith Shahibad,<br />Ahmadabad - 4.</p>
	</section>
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-608.01">
		<h1 class="part-title" epub:type="title">Scientific Papers</h1>
		<p><strong>1. Reconstructing Indian Population History</strong></p>
		<p>by David Reich, Kumaraswamy Thangaraj, Nick Patterson, Alkes L. Price and Lolji Singh.</p>
		<p><strong>2. P. Prehistory of India</strong></p>
		<p>Y - chromosomes, Evaluating demic diffusion sceneries by Sangamitra Sahoo et al</p>
		<p><strong>3. The Genetic Heritage of the Earliest Settlers Persists both in Indian Tribal and Caste Populations</strong></p>
		<p>by T. Kivisild, S. Rootsi, M. Metspalu et. al.</p>
		<p><strong>4. Unique Origin of Andaman Islanders : Insight from Autosomal Log</strong></p>
		<p>by K. Thangaraj, G. Chaubey, A.G Reddy, V.K. Singh and L. Singh</p>
		<p><strong>5. Genetic Affinities of the Andaman Islanders a Vanishing Human Population.</strong></p>
		<p>by Kumaraswamy Thangaraj et. al</p>
		<p><strong>6. Reconstructing the Origin of Andaman Islands</strong></p>
		<p>by Kumaraswamy Thangaraj et al</p>
		<p><strong>7. The Slow Births of Agriculture</strong></p>
		<p>by Heather Pringle</p>
		<p><strong>8. Y-Chromosome Lineages Trace Diffesious of People and Languages in Southwestern Asia</strong></p>
		<p><strong>9. Middle Palolithic Assemblages from the Indian Subcontinent before and after the Toba Super - Eruption</strong></p>
		<p>by Michael Petraglia Ravi Korisettar.</p>
	</section>
<!--
Tamil Text convertion problem
-->
</body>
</html>
