<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>ಸೋಲೊಪ್ಪಲಾರೆ</title>
	<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000b.1">
		<h1 class="level1-title hide" epub:type="title">Copyright</h1>
		<p><strong>ಸೋಲೊಪ್ಪಲಾರೆ</strong></p>
		<p>[ಅಚಲ ಬದುಕೊಂದರ ಕಥೆ]</p>
		<p><strong>ಹಿಂದಿ ಮೂಲ:</strong> ವಿಜಯ್ ತ್ರಿವೇದಿ</p>
		<p><strong>ಅನುವಾದ:</strong> ಸಿ. ವಿ. ಶೇಷಾದ್ರಿ ಹೊಳವನಹಳ್ಳಿ</p>
		<p>Published by : <strong>Prism Books Pvt. Ltd.</strong><br /> # 1865, 32nd Cross, 10th Main<br /> BSK II Stage, Bengaluru - 560 070.<br /> Phone: 080-26714108, Telefax: 080-26713979<br /> email: logistics@prismbooks.com<br /> Website: www.prismbooks.com</p>
		<p><em>Also at</em></p>
		<p><strong>Chennai :</strong> 044-24311244, prismchennai@prismbooks.com</p>
		<p><strong>Hyderabad :</strong> 040-27612938, prismhyderabad@prismbooks.com</p>
		<p><strong>Kochi :</strong> 0484-4000945, prismkochi@prismbooks.com</p>
		<p><strong>Kolkata	 :</strong> 09831537010,   prismkolkata@prismbooks.com</p>
		<p class="text-center">First published in Kannada by Prism books Pvt. Ltd.,<br /> By arrangement with Harper Collins Publishers India Limited © Vijay Trivedi</p>
		<p>Price : &#8377; 399</p>
		<p>First Print : 2017</p>
		<p>Printed on : Bulk Print</p>
		<p>Pages : 412</p>
		<p>Layout &amp; Wrapper design : Prism Books Pvt. Ltd.,</p>
		<p>ISBN : 978-93-86506-58-0</p>
		<p>Printed at : Sree Ranga Printers Pvt. Ltd. Bengaluru</p>
		<p>© All rights reserved. This publication is sold under the understanding that without the prior permission of the publisher, it cannot be used in any form either commercially or otherwise. No part of this publication may be reproduced and sold or transmitted as it is or in any modified form, by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. These conditions are binding on the buyer also.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
