<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Albert Einstein</title>
	<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000c.1">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Preface</h1>
		<p>Albert Einstein was one of the greatest scientists that mankind has seen and stands as an individual whose intelligence was perhaps the ultimate. He tackled the very fundamental questions in physics. He probed deeply into the heart of things and was never happy with superficial knowledge. He questioned, questioned and questioned. He accepted nothing that was imposed upon him. The result, as many are aware, was the Theory of Relativity which proposed a new interpretation of gravity.</p>
		<p>One wonders – what was his life like? Did he always think of science and nothing else? Was he absent-minded? How was he at school? Was he the smartest student in class? Did he outdo his classmates in examinations? How was his personal life? What about his children? Were they as intelligent?</p>
		<p>In this book I have attempted to take the reader through a journey into Einstein’s life and answer such questions. During the course of my research, as I collated and sifted through the vast literature that is available about Einstein, I was excited and exhilarated. It appears he lived like most of us; yet, endowed with a spark of genius he surpassed the greatest scientists of his time. I have tried to develop this aspect of his life.</p>
		<p>Today, there are numerous books about Einstein and his achievements; most of them academic and very authoritative. This is a simple book which students in universities and people with a basic knowledge of physics can read and appreciate. Of course, I owe a lot to books already written, Internet sites and TV documentaries about Einstein and Relativity. Visits to the Einstein Museum and his apartment in Bern offered useful insights.</p>
		<p>I did not want to stop at merely tracing Einstein’s life. In an attempt to capture the essence of his theories, I have briefly delineated the Special Theory of Relativity and the General Theory of Relativity in simple terms in Part 2. By no means complete, I think this will encourage the reader to explore more deeply.</p>
		<p>This book is part of a series on great scientists published by Prism Books Pvt. Ltd. My book on Srinivasa Ramanujan, the great mathematician has already been published.</p>
		<p>I thank Pranesh Siravara of the Prism Books for undertaking to publish this book and his staff for an efficient production. I particularly appreciate the great editing work done by Shubha Srikanth in making the book more readable and tangible to the average reader.</p>
		<p>After completing the first draft of the manuscript, I read a few pages every Thursday to the working group on non-fiction at the New South Wales Writers Centre in Sydney. Members of the Centre, the late Charles Cox , Alita Tanswell, Aleit Woodward , Don Morison, Filip Rafaneli, Jules Lewicki, Helen Lyne and Suzanne Wohlthat, offered many valuable suggestions to make my text more coherent. Brian Bell and Chakravarthy Madhusudana have read the manuscript word by word and suggested changes. I am indebted to all of them.</p>
		<p>Of course, such a book was possible only because of the support and understanding of my wife Usha.</p>
		<p class="text-right">
			<strong>Sydney Srinivas</strong>
			Sydney, August 2014.
		</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
