<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Albert Einstein</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-009">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">The Call of The Jews</h1>
		<p>As stated earlier, the British had their reservations about Einstein for he was considered German; the Germans were outraged that he was a Jew. It was easy for the latter to make Jews the scapegoat for their defeat in the war and its repercussions. At this juncture, Einstein felt he could not remain indifferent to the events shaping up around him and was compelled to take a stand. One such cause that warranted his attention was Zionism. He sympathised with the Jewish cause and openly supported the formation of a Hebrew University in Jerusalem. But he would not affiliate himself with any Zionist organisation</p>
		<p>Anti-Semitic feelings were raging in Germany and Einstein became a soft target. One of the outspoken Germans who voiced his opinion was Paul Weyland, an engineer. He sought to diminish the influence of Jews in the government and society at large. He wrote articles claiming that Relativity was a Jewish hoax. He laid the foundation for an organisation called The Study Group of German Scientists for the Preservation of Science. Ernst Gehrcke, a theoretical physicist, joined him.</p>
		<p>A big rally was held at the Berlin Philharmonic on August 20, 1920. Money was lavishly spent. Both Weyland and Gehrcke spoke their usual rhetoric – “Theory of Relativity is Jewish and communist. It poisons the wellsprings of German science.” The news was also published in the New York Times. As Gehrcke spoke, there was a disturbance and murmur in the audience. “Einstein, Einstein”. Einstein had come to the rally to enjoy the fun! He regarded it as a joke.</p>
		<p>But he was very perturbed; he considered moving away from Berlin. He wrote an article in a local paper that read, “Those two speakers are not worthy of my pen.”</p>
		<p>Another physicist, Philipp Lenard was behind the attack on Jewish scientists. Well known to Einstein, he had worked on the photoelectric effect and was also the recipient of the 1905 Nobel Prize. The publicity and fame that Einstein had achieved for his Theory of Relativity had made Lenard envious.</p>
		<p>By expressing his views against nationalism, Einstein had only made matters worse. His own friends wished he had not written the article. Lenard on the other hand condemned it and demanded an apology. Einstein would not render one. This further enraged Lenard and drove him to publicly become an Anti-Semite and a Nazi.</p>
		<p>There were also other groups and organisations that tried to put down Jewish Science as they called it. Adolf Hitler led the attack in 1921 by writing in a newspaper thus, “Science is being taught by Hebrews.”</p>
		<section class="level2 unnumbered" id="id-009.01">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Mother’s Death</h2>
			<p>Objectivity takes a backseat when it comes to intimate human relationships, especially with regards to one’s mother; the selfless soul who bestows unconditional love and affection upon her children. Einstein’s mother Pauline was suffering from stomach cancer and needed special care. She moved to his house towards the end of 1919 and died in February 1920. It was the second occasion when he wept (the first was when Mileva moved away taking his children with her).</p>
		</section>
		<section class="level2 unnumbered" id="id-009.02">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Listen to the heart – Travel to America</h2>
			<p>Kurt Blumenfeld was the leader of the Zionist movement in Germany. He had sought Einstein’s support in the past for the creation of a homeland for the Jews in Palestine. Though supportive of the cause, Einstein did not become a member of the local Jewish organisation but made a contribution to one of the welfare schemes of the association. However, Einstein eventually became a member for purely social reasons.</p>
			<p>In 1921, Blumenfeld came with a message from Chaim Weizmann, President of the World Zionist Organisation. Weizmann was a biochemist who had migrated from Russia to America. He later became the first president of Israel.</p>
			<p>Weizmann invited Einstein to accompany him on a tour of America to generate funds to start a Hebrew University in Jerusalem. At first Einstein declined the request. After all, he was only a scientist and not an orator who could attract people or funds. But soon it became apparent that Weizmann’s request was almost an order. Einstein had to consent. Further, his heart compelled him to help the Zionist cause. The fame of Relativity had carried with it a certain responsibility towards the Jews. He had committed himself to the Solvay Congress, to be held soon. He sent his apology to the organisers.</p>
			<p>America, which had fought against Germany in the war, received the news of Einstein’s visit with enthusiasm. Lecture invitations, honorary doctorates, awards and honours poured in. America prepared itself to receive him.</p>
			<p>Einstein set sail from Holland on March 21, 1921. He sought two cabins in the ship, one for himself and the other for Elsa so he could concentrate on his work during travel. As the ship crossed the Atlantic, Einstein explained his Theory of Relativity to Weizmann, but in vain.</p>
			<p>On April 2, the ship reached Manhattan. Einstein alighted dressed in a grey wool coat and felt hat, a pipe in one hand and violin in the other. As can be expected, reporters eagerly awaited him. They had a thousand questions to ask.</p>
			<p>The first meeting with the press took place in the captain’s cabin. Reporters were hardly interested in his present mission. They were more interested in Relativity.</p>
			<p>“Please give a one-sentence description of Relativity.”</p>
			<p>“I am trying to compress Relativity into a single book,  you want me compress it to a sentence!”</p>
			<p>When he was compelled he merely said, “It is a theory of space and time as far as physics is concerned. It leads to a theory of gravitation.”</p>
			<p>Einstein confessed that he thought the opponents of the theory were politically driven. It was anti-Semitism. When Elsa was questioned by reporters about her understanding of Relativity she remarked, “It is not required for my happiness.”</p>
			<p>The mayor of New York received him. As Einstein was taken to his hotel through the Jewish part of the city, thousands of spectators lined the route. He was greeted by honks of cars everywhere. More than ten thousand people assembled when Einstein and Weizmann were given a public reception. Einstein was indeed surprised when a gentleman named Max Talmey, a physician greeted him. He was none other than Max Talmud, who had lent him books back in Munich in his childhood. Einstein visited his daughters at his apartment.</p>
			<p>He stayed in New York for three weeks delivering lectures and attending receptions. Since he spoke in German, hardly anyone understood him. Yet the crowds jostled and craved for a glance of this great scientist. Every venue was packed, with people even standing in the aisles. After all he was the superstar of physics!</p>
			<p>The next stop was Washington. Funnily enough, the American Senate tried to debate Relativity. In a meeting, President Warren G. Harding confessed he knew nothing of the theory. A reception at the National Science Academy followed. Unable to bear long boring speeches, Einstein told the man seated next to him, “I have now developed a theory of eternity”. The academy building now houses a 12 foot tall bronze statue of Einstein.</p>
			<p>By the time he went to Chicago, Einstein was quite comfortable with the reporters. Strangely enough, the press seemed to have formed an impression that only twelve people in the world understood the Theory of Relativity. He corrected them saying, “Anyone who has studied science can understand it if he puts in effort.”</p>
			<p>Lectures all through the week and honorary degrees from universities marked his stay in Princeton. The university undertook to publish his lectures in the form of a book entitled The Meaning of Relativity, popular even today. He spoke in German and scribbled some 125 equations on the blackboard. After one such lecture, Einstein apparently uttered the following words - “Raffiniertist der Herrgott, aber boshaft ist er nicht”; translated as God is subtle, but he is not malicious. Professor Veblen overheard these words and sought his permission to etch them in concrete in the very room where he uttered them. This building later became the home of the Institute of Advanced Study where Einstein worked during his last years. An explanation of the quote given by Einstein himself is, “Nature conceals her secrets by her sublimity and not by trickery.”</p>
			<p>Einstein visited Harvard and Cleveland, now the Case Western Reserve University. This is where Michelson and Morley had conducted their famous experiment and had showed that the speed of light is the same for all observers, irrespective of their motion.</p>
			<p>The tour gave Einstein publicity and exposure. It confirmed his resolve to fight for the Jewish cause. But it was not a big success financially. Weizmann had hoped to raise 4 million dollars. Only about 750,000 dollars were collected.</p>
		</section>
		<section class="level2 unnumbered" id="id-009.03">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Situation deteriorates in Germany</h2>
			<p>After his return from America Einstein visited England where he addressed the Royal Society and paid his respects to Isaac Newton, by placing a wreath on his grave in Westminster Abbey. During the France tour that followed, he visited the war graves of soldiers who had laid down their lives protecting their country.</p>
			<p>Einstein went to Zurich and stayed with his family. He was happy to see his children doing very well. There was happiness, music flowed.</p>
			<p>Germany itself was going downhill with acute inflation breaking the economy. A loaf of bread that costed about 1 mark in 1920 costed 700 marks in 1923 and later reached 1 billion marks! Germany was forced to issue a new currency. They had to find scapegoats. Yes, they were readily available; the French, the English, the internationalists, and of course, the Jews.</p>
		</section>
		<section class="level2 unnumbered" id="id-009.04">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Walther Rathenau</h2>
			<p>Walther Rathenau was a wealthy businessman in Berlin and the son of the founder of the AEG (General Electric Company). Though a Jew, he was a patriot. He rose through the ranks in the ministry and became the foreign minister of Germany. Einstein and Rathenau knew each other very well. However, Rathenau did not endorse Zionism.</p>
			<p>Rathenau was responsible for the Treaty of Versailles with France and the Treaty of Rapallo with the Soviet Union. Though the treaties helped end the war, the Germans saw it as a defeat and a conspiracy of the Jews, resulting in young nationalists assassinating Rathenau on June 24, 1922. The whole country was moved. Offices, schools and colleges were closed for his funeral as a mark of respect and a million people assembled to pay their tribute.</p>
			<p>Two people did not mourn his death. Hitler hailed the assassins as national heroes. Philipp Lenard did not cancel his lectures in the university.</p>
			<p>The assassination sent shock waves all over Europe. The police discovered that Einstein’s name was on the hit list of the nationalists. They warned Einstein that he could be the next target. He was advised to move out of Berlin and avoid public appearances. Einstein moved to Kiel, a town about 90 kms from Hamburg in Northern Germany. He even toyed with the idea of settling down and working in an engineering firm in Kiel. But Relativity and cosmology were pulling him the other way; science was lucky, theoretical physics in particular.</p>
			<p>Einstein was a member of the League of Nations and was on its committee for intellectual cooperation. The League sought to induce a pacifist spirit among the member nations. With rising anti-Semitism in Germany, he tendered his resignation, but was persuaded to withdraw. The committee required that its members address the students of the Geneva University. Einstein gave a violin concert instead! Somebody asked him how he was able to remain calm when there was so much turmoil in the world. He answered, “We must remember that this is a very small star. And probably some of the larger and more important stars may be virtuous and happy.”</p>
		</section>
		<section class="level2 unnumbered" id="id-009.05">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Celebrity Again</h2>
			<p>The nationalists wanted his blood. Einstein lived in fear. His fame was a direct threat to his life. However, he did get an opportunity to move away from the political turmoil of Germany and enjoy the life of a celebrity. He was invited by his Japanese publisher to undertake a lecture tour of Japan. He accepted, and toured Asia and Israel during 1922 - 23.</p>
			<p>Einstein experienced a wide variety of cultures and manners. In Ceylon (today’s Sri Lanka) he was transported from place to place in a rickshaw pulled by men. Einstein disapproved such exploitation of human beings. The Jews living in Singapore assembled to welcome him. Sir Menasseh Meyer, a very rich man, donated a large sum of money to the Hebrew University.</p>
			<p>As he was travelling to Japan he received news that he had been awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for the year 1921. He received a telegram on November 10, which read, “Nobel Prize for physics awarded to you. More by letter.” In fact, he had indications before he left Berlin. The chairman of the Nobel Committee had requested him to postpone the Asia trip and be available to visit Stockholm in December. Einstein could not put off the trip and undertook the tour as per schedule.</p>
			<p>Einstein received 2,000 pounds for his lecture series in Japan. His lecture in Tokyo was attended by as many as twenty five thousand people. The lecture, of course with an interpreter, went on for four hours. Einstein took pity on his audience and reduced the duration of his next lecture in another city to three hours. The organisers were deeply hurt as they took it as an insult. Einstein had to stick to his four hour lectures!</p>
			<p>He also met the emperor and empress of Japan. Einstein liked the Japanese and wrote to his son, “Of all the people I have met, I like the Japanese the most, as they are modest, intelligent and considerate and have a feel for art.” Einstein was devastated when the first atomic bomb fell on Hiroshima.</p>
			<p>In Tel Aviv, Jerusalem and Haifa, Einstein was treated on par with a head of state. Even a gun salute was issued. Their royal formality knew no bounds and Einstein was compelled to accept the princely arrangements.</p>
			<p>Einstein took a walk to the temples and the Western Wall. He felt that, “The Jews were a people with a past but no future.” He also attended a Zionist reception and remarked that it was a great day in his life.</p>
			<p>He was asked everywhere in Israel, “Would you like to come and settle down in Jerusalem?” The considered answer was, “My heart says yes, but my reason says no.”</p>
		</section>
		<section class="level2 unnumbered" id="id-009.06">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Einstein and the Nobel Prize</h2>
			<p>Today, in the twenty first century, there are no reservations about weather Einstein deserved the Nobel Prize. But the circumstance was different in Germany a hundred years ago.</p>
			<p>The story begins in 1910 when Wilhelm Ostwald nominated Einstein for the Nobel Prize. In fact, he was the one that Einstein had approached, in vain, for a job nine years earlier. His proposal was based on Einstein’s work on Relativity. Ostwald argued that Relativity was a theory in physics and not a philosophy as many had assumed. The nomination was rejected.</p>
			<p>Einstein was nominated for the prize quite a few times in the following years. The terms of the Nobel Prize stated that it should be awarded to the most important discovery or invention. Some people opined that Relativity was neither of the two. There were quite a few sceptics; they sought experimental verification of the theory, which was also successfully provided in 1919 as we have seen. Noted scientists such as Lorentz, Niels Bohr and other friends submitted nominations in favour of Einstein, hailing him as an avant-garde scientist.</p>
			<p>Politics began to play. Some German scientists strongly envied Einstein’s popularity. Philipp Lenard and Gehrcke became active behind the scenes. They tried to pull down Relativity itself. Surprisingly, in 1920, the prize was awarded to Charles Guillaume, associated with making alloys when many people felt it was Einstein’s turn.</p>
			<p>In 1921, fourteen scientists including Planck and Eddington nominated Einstein again. Said Eddington, “He stands above his contemporaries as Newton did.” This time, Allvar Gullstrand, an ophthalmologist, was requested to prepare a report. He was bent on writing a negative report on Relativity and he did. The result, nobody was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1921.</p>
			<p>In reality, the Nobel committee had put itself to shame. Sincere scientists and thinkers were outraged. The French physicist Marcel Brillouin wrote to the committee, “Think for a moment what the general opinion will be fifty years from now, if Einstein’s name does not appear on the list of Nobel laureates.” Now, the task of saving the committee from ridicule fell on Carl Wilhelm Oseen, a theoretical physicist. He was sure that the very mention of Relativity should somehow be avoided. So, he thought that Einstein’s chances of winning the prize would be better if he cited the photoelectric effect. He weighed every word and prepared his supportive report on Einstein. He called Einstein’s theory the Law of Photoelectric Effect.</p>
			<p>Oseen was exceedingly clever. He made another suggestion; “Give Einstein the delayed 1921 prize and let Niels Bohr have the 1922 prize.” The Nobel committee accepted the recommendation.</p>
			<p>The award ceremony was held on December 10, 1922, and Einstein could not be present as he was touring Japan. As was the practice, the ambassador of the recipient’s country (in this case Germany) was to receive the prize on behalf of the recipient. Einstein did not like the idea of the German ambassador representing him; he preferred the Swiss ambassador. But the German government objected saying that the recipient of the award being a German, only the German ambassador is entitled to represent him. The Nobel committee solved the problem by requesting the Swedish ambassador in Germany to go over to Einstein in Berlin and hand over the medal and the certificate.</p>
			<p>Einstein delivered his acceptance speech the next year in July. He spoke only about Relativity and barely mentioned the photoelectric effect. The prize money amounted to 121,572 Kroner or USD 32,250, all of which went to Mileva as per the divorce agreement. She bought three houses and rental properties.</p>
			<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		</section>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
