<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Albert Einstein</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-019">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Einstein Timeline</h1>
		<table>
			<caption>(Taken from Albert Einstein at:<br /><a href="http://www.alberteinsteinsite.com/einsteintimeline.html">http://www.alberteinsteinsite.com/einsteintimeline.html</a>)</caption>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1879</strong></td>
				<td>Born March 14 at 11:30 AM in Ulm, Germany.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1880</strong></td>
				<td>Einstein family moves to Munich.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1881</strong></td>
				<td>Sister Maja (Maria) is born.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1884</strong></td>
				<td>The Compass - A gift from his father sparks his wonder.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1885-1888</strong></td>
				<td>Pupil at Catholic Elementary School in Munich.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1888</strong></td>
				<td>Pupil at Luitpold-Gymnasium, Munich for the next six years.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1889</strong></td>
				<td>Meets Max Talmud. Introduced to important texts in science and philosophy.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1894</strong></td>
				<td>Parents move to Milan. Six months later, Einstein leaves Gymnasium without completing his schooling and joins his family in Pavia, Italy.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1895-96</strong></td>
				<td>Pupil at Cantonal School in Aarau, Switzerland.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1896</strong></td>
				<td>Renounces his German citizenship.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1896-1900</strong></td>
				<td>Student at the Polytechnic, later the ETH, Zurich.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1901</strong></td>
				<td>Acquires Swiss citizenship. Completes his first scientific paper.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1902</strong></td>
				<td>Daughter Lieserl born to Mileva Marić in Novi Sad, Hungary. Appointed as Technical Expert, third class at the Swiss Patent Office in Bern.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1903</strong></td>
				<td>Marriage to Mileva Marić in Bern. Found “Akademie Olympia” with Conrad Habicht and Maurice Solovine.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1904</strong></td>
				<td>Son Hans Albert born in Bern.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1905</strong></td>
				<td>The annus mirabilis (miracle year) : completes papers on light quanta, Brownian Motion, and Special Theory of Relativity. Receives Ph.D. from Zurich University.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1908</strong></td>
				<td>Appointed Associate Professor at Bern University.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1909</strong></td>
				<td>Resigns from Patent Office. Appointed Associate Professor of Theoretical Physics at Zurich University.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1910</strong></td>
				<td>Second son Eduard born in Bern.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1911</strong></td>
				<td>Predicts bending of light.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1911-12</strong></td>
				<td>Professor of Theoretical Physics at German University of Prague.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1912-14</strong></td>
				<td>Professor of Theoretical Physics at the Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1914</strong></td>
				<td>Appointed Professor at University of Berlin and Member of Prussian Academy of Sciences. Separates from his wife, Mileva Marić - she returns to Zurich with her two sons.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1915</strong></td>
				<td>Joins pacifist movement. Completes logical structure of the General Theory of Relativity.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1916</strong></td>
				<td>Publication of the General Theory of Relativity.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1917</strong></td>
				<td>Writes first paper on cosmology. Appointed Director of Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics in Berlin.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1917-1920</strong></td>
				<td>Suffers from liver ailment, stomach ulcer, jaundice and general weakness.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1919</strong></td>
				<td>Divorces Mileva Marić. Bending of light observed during solar eclipse in West Africa and Brazil. First discussions on Zionism with Kurt Blumenfeld. Marries his cousin Elsa.<br /> Announcement at joint meeting of Royal Society and Royal Astronomical Society that Einstein’s theories have been confirmed by eclipse observations. Einstein becomes a world renowned physicist.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1920</strong></td>
				<td>Mass meeting against the General Theory of Relativity in Berlin. Appointed Special Visiting Professor at Leiden University.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1921</strong></td>
				<td>First visit to the U.S. with Chaim Weizmann: fund-raising tour for The Hebrew University. Lectures at Princeton University on Theory of Relativity.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1922</strong></td>
				<td>Completes first paper on Unified Field Theory. Lecture tours in Japan and China.<br />Awarded Nobel Prize for Physics for the year1921.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1923</strong></td>
				<td>Visit to Palestine: holds inaugural scientific lecture at future site of The Hebrew University in Jerusalem. Named First Honorary citizen of Tel Aviv. Visit to Spain.<br />Lecture in acknowledgment of Nobel Prize in Göteborg, Sweden.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1927</strong></td>
				<td>Begins intense debate with Niels Bohr on the foundations of quantum mechanics.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1928</strong></td>
				<td>Suffers temporary physical collapse - enlargement of the heart is diagnosed.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1930</strong></td>
				<td>Intensive activism in support of pacifism.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1930-32</strong></td>
				<td>Three trips to U.S. Stays mainly at the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, during winter semesters.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1932</strong></td>
				<td>Public correspondence with Sigmund Freud on the nature of war. Appointed Professor at The Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton. Plans to divide his time between Berlin and Princeton. Leaves Germany for ever.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1933</strong></td>
				<td>Declares that he will not return to Germany. Resigns from Prussian Academy of Sciences. Spends spring and summer in Belgium and Oxford. Emigrates to U.S. in September.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1935</strong></td>
				<td>The Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) paradox is published.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1936</strong></td>
				<td>Elsa Einstein dies.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1938</strong></td>
				<td>Publication of the book, The Evolution of Physics.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1939</strong></td>
				<td>Writes famous letter to President Franklin D. Roosevelt recommending U.S. research on nuclear weapons.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1940</strong></td>
				<td>Acquires US Citizenship.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1943</strong></td>
				<td>Works as consultant with the Research and Development Division of the U.S. Navy Bureau of Ordnance, section Ammunition and Explosives.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1944</strong></td>
				<td>Handwritten copy of his 1905 paper on Special Relativity auctioned for six million dollars in Kansas City, as a contribution to the American war effort.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1945</strong></td>
				<td>Shocked by the nuclear bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1946</strong></td>
				<td>Becomes Chairman of the Emergency Committee for Atomic Scientists. Expresses public support for the formation of a world government.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1947</strong></td>
				<td>Intense activity on behalf of disarmament and world government.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1948</strong></td>
				<td>Supports creation of the State of Israel. First wife, Mileva Marić, dies in Zurich.<br />Intact aneurysm of the abdominal aorta disclosed.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1949</strong></td>
				<td>Publication of Autobiographical Notes.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1950</strong></td>
				<td>Signs Last Will and Testament: Otto Nathan and Helen Dukas named co-trustees.<br />The Hebrew University named as the ultimate repository of his personal papers.<br />Collection of essays - Out of My Later Years, published.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1952</strong></td>
				<td>Offered presidency of the State of Israel.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td><strong>1955</strong></td>
				<td>Co-signs the Russell-Einstein Manifesto, warning of nuclear threat. Rupture of the aortic aneurysm.<br />Dies April 18 at 1:15 AM in Princeton Hospital at the age of 76.</td>
			</tr>
		</table>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
	</section>
</body>
</html>
