<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>Nagpur Ashram</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body>
<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-">
<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">ARYANS</h1>
</section>
<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-">
<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Who Are They?</h1>
<section class="level2 numbered" id="id-.">
<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">A. R. Vasudevan</h2>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">Prism Books Pvt. Ltd. </span>
</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">Bengaluru </span>
<SPAN class="en">. </span>
<SPAN class="en">Chennai </span>
<SPAN class="en">. </span>
<SPAN class="en">Hyderabad </span>
<SPAN class="en">. </span>
<SPAN class="en">Kochi </span>
<SPAN class="en">. </span>
<SPAN class="en">Kolkata </span>
</p>
<p>Chp-0 preface.pmd 1 12/22/2012, 9:13 AM</p>
</section>
</section>
<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-">
<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">ARYANS</h1>
<section class="level2 numbered" id="id-.">
<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">WhoAre They?</h2>
<h3><em>by </em>A.R. Vasudevan </h3>
<h5>Published by : Prism Books Pvt. Ltd. </h5>
<p># 1865, 32<span><sup>nd </Sup></span>Cross, 10<span><Sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-">th <\/a><\/sup></span>Main, BSK II Stage Bengaluru -560 070. Phone: 080-26714108 Telefax : 080-26713979, e-mail : info@prismbooks.com</p>
<p>
<em>Also at </em>
</p>
<p>Chennai : Tel: 044-24311244, e-mail: prismchennai@prismbooks.com Hyderabad : Tel: 040-23261828, e-mail: prismhyderabad@prismbooks.com Kochi : Tel: 0484-4000945, e-mail: prismkochi@prismbooks.com Kolkata : Tel: 033-24297957, e-mail: prismkolkata@prismbooks.com</p>
<h5>© Prism Books Pvt. Ltd., 2012 </h5>
<p>Pages : 266</p>
<p>Price : ` 295</p>
<p>Printed on : 80 gsm Maplitho</p>
<p>DTP : Smt. Ahalya</p>
<p>No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. ISBN : 978-81-7286-746-1</p>
<p>Printed at : Sreeranga Printers Pvt. Ltd., Bengaluru</p>
<p>Chp-0 preface.pmd 2 12/22/2012, 9:13 AM</p>
<h4>
<SPAN class="en">Painting of Samudhra Manthana </span>
</h4>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">– </span>
<SPAN class="en">Rama Vasudevan </span>
</p>
<p>Chp-0 preface.pmd 3 12/22/2012, 9:13 AM</p>
<p>Chp-0 preface.pmd 4 12/22/2012, 9:13 AM</p>
<h4>
<SPAN class="en">ACKNOWLEDGEMENT </span>
</h4>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">My study regarding the origins and migration of the Aryans and others, has been a typical case of a pigmy perched on the shoulders of a giant, seeing a little bit more than the giant. The giants in this case have been Lokmanya B.G. Tilak, </span>
</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">P. </span>
<SPAN class="en">Sangarapillai, Swami Harshananda of Ramakrishna Math, Bangalore, James Watson Luigi Luca Cavalli -Sforza, Spencer Wells, N.S. Rajaram, David Frawtey and S. Kalyanaraman. What I saw was not only a little bit more than what they saw, but it was at times, interesting, exciting and thought provoking. I acknowledge those giants as my teachers for adding to my knowledge. </span>
</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">As the books authored by B.G. Tilak are almost a century old, I had difficulty to get copies. Fortunately, one important book was available at the Indian Institute of World Culture, but it was too fragile to handle. It is Air Marshall B.U. Chengappa (Retd.) who helped me to get the book from Pune. I must acknowledge his very valuable help. </span>
</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">Dr. Kumarasamy Thangaraj of CCMB, Hyderabad and Dr. Ravi Korisettar of Karnataka University were very helpful with prompt responses to my request for scientific papers. Their help encouraged me to continue with my difficult task I had undertaken. I must acknowledge their valuable contribution. </span>
</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">I have also been benefitted by media reports in The Hindu, Times of India and Daily Thanthi apart from valuable imputs from </span>
</p>
<p>Chp-0 preface.pmd 5 12/22/2012, 9:13 AM</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">the internet with the help of my son Kesavan. My Daughter-inlaw, Malini was helpful in typing some potions of the book. Others also helped in typing and in particular the services of Sridhar, my relative and Manivannan were valuable. For illustrations Narendra and Manjunath helped me. </span>
</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">I was very much elated by the first reaction of the Editor, Ms. Hema Rao after reading the manuscript. I must acknowledge her help in correcting mistakes and suggesting imporvements. </span>
</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">Most importantly, I must acknowledge the help extended by the publishers. Mr. Pranesh of M/s Prism Books Pvt. Ltd. agreed to undertake the publishing in our first meeting itself. Because of my age, he was very particular that the publishing materials were collected and delivered from my residence. Similarly the efforts of Mrs. Roopa were very encouraging and positive. </span>
</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">As I wanted to reproduce some portions from ‘We Tamils’ by P. Sangarapillai. I wrote to his son Dr. Sang Manoharan for permission. He promptly replied agreeing to my request. I acknowledge with thanks his prompt and encouraging response. </span>
</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">I requested N.S. Rajaram for a similar permission regarding the books authored by him and David Frawley. While agreeing to my request, he advised that written permission was not necessary provided I mention the sources. My daughter Rama was helping throughout the period. She did the painting for Samudra Manthana which appears in the book. She did varied chores such as proof reading, liaise with the publishers and at times chasing me to hasten up the work connected with the book. </span>
</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">– </span>
<SPAN class="en">A.R. Vasudevan </span>
</p>
<p>Chp-0 preface.pmd 6 12/22/2012, 9:13 AM</p>
</section>
</section>
</body>
</html>
