<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Powerful Dialogues</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Preface</h1>
		<p>Art is a way to express life. Science is a way to explain life. Their communion is beautiful.</p>
		<p>This book was not written. It evolved on its own over time. Its growth was genuine and organic.</p>
		<p>A mentee, who calls me his Divine Sister, planted the idea of writing a book in my mind. He said that I must write a book because my words have &ldquo;transformational power&rdquo;. The idea began to germinate when I started reflecting on the one question that has always intrigued me as a clinical psychologist, mentor and trainer: What is the dynamics of change in human behaviour?</p>
		<p>As life unfolded in its many facets through my interactions with people from various walks of life, the beauty of science, neuroscience, psychology and the art of communication gave me insights into human behaviour that I had never experienced otherwise. I have always been fascinated by how seemingly ordinary words sometimes have profound impact and initiate change in human thought and behaviour.</p>
		<p>This fascination is the driving force behind Powerful Dialogues.</p>
		<p>These thoughts led me to recognise the profound tools for change dynamics found inthe power of dialogues. This book is an attempt to trace the transformation engendered by dialogue in a certain context. It chronicles the experiential journey of a few people whose lives significantly changed because of a dialogue that proved powerful.</p>
		<p>My quest led me to my past and the past of many others whose lives have been transformed. I revisited my own life experiences to discover suchdialogues that played a significant role in initiating change in my personal and professional life. They led me to make decisions that defined me as a person and a professional.</p>
		<p>I interviewed several people - including mentees, clients, trainees - to discover if and how my words had had an impact on them. I wanted to unpack the process behind the words that changedtheir lives, especially the actionable objectivesaccomplished as a result of the power of those words.</p>
		<p><strong>DIALOGUE * IMPACT * CHANGE</strong></p>
		<p>I applied the same strategy to my own experiences. I summoned up a series of dialogues I had with people over the years: dialogues I have had with myself, dialogues made by others that impacted my life, and dialogues I created that affected the lives of other people.</p>
		<p>What resulted is this book. It is not merely a compilation of Powerful Dialogues, but it traces the process involved in behavioural change as triggered by these Powerful Dialogues.</p>
		<p>These dialogues stir an activity within us. They were subtle momentary realisations that had the power to provide a fresh insight or bring forth a suppressed experience - like finding the right key to a lock.</p>
		<p>From this superstructure of experiences, a thematic framework forthis book emerged. I found that the dialogues compiled fell into one or more of the following five themes as experienced by the receiver (mentee, trainee, or patient): EMPATHY, CLARITY, CHALLENGING, DEFINING SELF AND TRUST. The book traces how dialogues expressing each of these human experiences initiated change in the receiver. All the stories narrated in the book are the real-life experiences of people I have interacted with personally.</p>
		<p>The narrative of the book is experiential in nature and non-prescriptive in content. It is neither a self-help book nor a technical handbook. Unlike most books that talk about change dynamics in the context of an organisation, Powerful Dialogues is highly individual-centric and uses self-reflection as its primary tool for transformation.</p>
		<p class="quote-author">&#x2014; Shobha Managoli</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter"/>
		<p><em>The deepest craving of human nature is the need to be appreciated.</em></p>
		<p class="text-right"><em>&#x2014; William James</em></p>
		<p><em>However, in my journey with each one of you, I saw beyond this craving. A genuine giving filled with generosity.  I have no words to express what I experienced. Hence using quotes to say and hoping that each one of you will understand the unsaid.</em></p>
		<p><em>No one who achieves success does so without the help of others.</em></p>
		<p class="text-right"><em>&#x2014; Alfred North Whitehead</em></p>
		<p><em>I acknowledge the contribution of each one of you with gratitude, because “Gratitude is when memory is stored in the heart and not in the mind.”</em></p>
		<p class="text-right"><em>&#x2014; Lionel Hampton.</em></p>
		<p><em>Each one of you have engraved yourself my heart and mind.</em></p>
		<p><em>When I was choosing to write or use the word --Thanks or Gratitude or Acknowledgment, this quote summed it all up for me:</em></p>
		<p><em>“I would maintain that thanks are the highest form of thought, and that gratitude is happiness doubled by wonder.”</em></p>
		<p class="text-right"><em>&#x2014; Gilbert C. Chesterton</em></p>
		<p><em>I just feel wonderful with all of you around and with me, in this journey of becoming an entrepreneur.  I have made new friends and amazing relationships have evolved and I have been able to see the unseen sides of many. These relationships have been the force that made me get up and write when I was stuck or when I questioned myself – Should I even do this?”</em></p>
		<p><em>“Gratitude unlocks the fullness of life. It turns what we have into enough, and more. It turns denial into acceptance, chaos to order, confusion to clarity. It can turn a meal into a feast, a house into a home, a stranger into a friend.” </em></p>
		<p class="text-right"><em>&#x2014; Melody Beattie</em></p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
