<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Powerful Dialogues</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-005">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Defining Self</h1>
		<p class="text-center"><em>‘Reaching the Unreached.’</em></p>
		<p>It was a time in my career when I was all set to expand my professional horizon. I was experimenting with various groups and profiles of clients, trying to figure out my likes-dislikes, exploring my comfort level and then narrowing down my area of interest. Little did I realise the irony: while I wished to spread my wings, I was indeed confining myself to a cage!</p>
		<p>As I sat discussing with my professor, who was also my mentor, I said, &ldquo;I want to decide whom I want to work with. So I am weighing my options to create a niche for myself.&rdquo;</p>
		<p>He mulled over for a few minutes, and looked straight into my eyes and said just these few words, &ldquo;Shobha, reach the unreached.&rdquo;</p>
		<p>In hindsight, I feel that this dialogue has perhaps had the most profound impact on my career and life. It set me thinking. I realised I needed to look outward. I differentiated <em>my</em> needs from the needs of <em>society</em>. The needs of the people who approached me became more important than the ego-centric approach I was trying to pursue. It helped me look beyond the socio-cultural profile of clients, the prestige associated with a certain clientele, the profit motive, the ease of catering to a specific section and all the other parameters that would have stunted my evolution professionally and personally.</p>
		<p>During the course of our career, we invariably settle down into our comfort zone. We may restrict our services to privileged urban clients or corporate clients; or, to clients with marital disharmony. The wisdom to go beyond a specific narrow section of clients came from my professor, and that decision has been liberating for me. I learned to walk the extra mile. I reached out to the underprivileged clients from nearby villages and children with learning disabilities who were marginalised due to unavailability and inaccessibility of professional services. Two decades ago, the need for therapists and counselors in these sectors was enormous.</p>
		<p>This dialogue from my professor which happened at that crucial juncture helped me define another significant dimension of my career. What is it that I ultimately hope to professionally achieve as a counselor? Popularity in professional circles, elite clientele I can boast about or wealth? In a world driven by commercial success, I had to distinguish between monetary fulfilment and work satisfaction. Today, I can say that my work satisfaction stems from the fact that I have traversed across boundaries - from pediatric to geriatric, from urban to rural and from the boardroom to the impoverished slums. Thereby, I am trying my bit at achieving social justice through my profession &ndash; making psychological counseling accessible to all.</p>
		<p>While assisting clients in crisis-situations, we often elevate ourselves to a higher plane. Fortunately, for me, this awareness came very early in my career, when I learned that I must identify my client as an equal and as a fellow human being. This, however, is not to be confused with empathy. Here, I am trying to establish the need for equality in the client-counselor relationship. We may develop a perception that our client is flawed and lacking in relation to ourselves.</p>
		<p>Recently, as I sat talking to one of my clients, she said, &ldquo;You&rsquo;ve never made me feel like a person who has a diagnosis. I feel like I have challenges, but you don&rsquo;t let them overwhelm me. You give me the awareness that I <em>need</em> to deal with them and the confidence that I <em>can</em> deal with them. You have shown me that problems have solutions which I just need to discover, and which I am capable of discovering.&rdquo;</p>
		<p>This feedback came from a 15-year-old during a counseling session. I was pleasantly surprised! I am a clinical psychologist by profession and diagnosis is what I am trained for. Here is a teenager who is subverting a fundamental principle of my practice.</p>
		<p>Her feedback evoked memories of an experience early in my career, which set right the equation I would establish with my clients. When I look back at that experience, I feel so overwhelmed at how a chance decision, seemingly insignificant, made in a flash of a second, can define you and define the way you function! A simple conscious decision becomes a defining principle that permeates through all your actions and words! It was indeed a moment of enlightenment!</p>
		<p>On my first day at a school for children with mental retardation, as I exited the Principal&rsquo;s office after taking charge as Psychological Counselor, these words, written in big, bold letters, caught my attention: &ldquo;When you judge another, remember, you do not define them, but you define yourself.&rdquo; Although etched in my mind, the words did not generate any great significance right then.</p>
		<p>A few months in, on a warm summer noon, I was standing among fifty odd children during the long break making sure they finished their lunch. After lunch they began to play; some ran, others screamed and laughed; a few just stood and watched. I felt utterly disconnected, like a stranger. I felt the whole world crashing in on me. I just hadn&rsquo;t established a rapport with the kids. I was honestly overwhelmed by the challenges they experienced as a result of retardation. I was quite nervous about how to reciprocate with them and how to help them and make their lives better. I felt helpless.</p>
		<p>I collected myself. I had to pace myself. As a first step, I took a deep breath, and asked myself this question: &ldquo;What am I going to address - their limitations, challenges or diagnosis?&rdquo;</p>
		<p>I felt someone tugging at my dress. This autistic child was urging me to join them in the fun and frolic. Albeit reluctantly, I joined them in their play. The children held my hand, formed a circle and danced and sang a song. I felt unburdened all of a sudden - glad to have been yanked out of my heavy thoughts. Innocence and pure joy filled the air. I found myself laughing and becoming one among them. My inhibitions vanished and I related to them in their sheer joy of being.</p>
		<p>After a while, I sat down for a few minutes to catch my breath. That&rsquo;s when Swami Vivekananda&rsquo;s words echoed in my ears: EACH SOUL IS POTENTIALLY DIVINE.</p>
		<p>At that instant, I realised that the children were much more than a diagnosis. They were not &lsquo;diagnostic labels&rsquo;. To view each child as a label, a file of compiled symptoms and diagnosis and treatment, would be dehumanising them. If I can focus on their inherent divinity alongside diagnostic intervention, I can find a way to address the specific needs of the children as well as their families, I realised.</p>
		<p>That moment of truth was an equaliser, it created a central point from which I was to operate as a professional counselor. My ability to recognise the divinity in each client created the panorama of my approach and practice. I still diagnose a client for constructing and conducting an effective intervention, but it is built on the foundation of the divinity they hold within themselves. And thus, Pooja became the girl with an affectionate smile (and no longer the girl with cerebral palsy), Ali became the boy full of innocence (and no longer the boy with microcephaly), and Manju became the boy with infectious enthusiasm (and not the boy with Down&rsquo;s Syndrome) and Monica&rsquo;s twinkling eyes made me forget all my worries.</p>
		<p>And yes, I had put into practice the words I had read in the principal&rsquo;s office!</p>
		<p>My teen client just affirmed my faith in this belief. Each time I experience some angst about my profession in general or about my practice in particular, I seek refuge in Swami Vivekananda&rsquo;s words, and I find comfort and reassurance. This dialogue has been my spiritual guide. Labeling and treating my clients as patients, or defining their individuality with an illness or a problem or as mere numbers in a case sheet, would have dehumanised me as well. I would have placed myself on a higher pedestal as a savior and not as a mere helper in the journey of my client and of my own. My approach would have been condescending. This standpoint has given me a sense of humility.</p>
		<p>I recognised the divinity in this teenager, and that gave me the scope to look at her environment, which had to be altered to empower her. I had to move from finding maladaptation within her to addressing external environmental issues that were affecting her and helping her find solutions.</p>
		<p>This deep-rooted belief doesn&rsquo;t allow me to define success in the same way that other professionals can. I have always been reluctant to collect testimonials from my clients. Many trainers or facilitators proudly display client testimonials on their websites. Confidentiality and respecting the dignity of my client is my priority. If I have helped a client find solutions, the purpose of my profession is fulfilled.</p>
		<p>However, feedback is important to me. One such input from my mentee not just baffled me, but also affirmed my dislike for testimonials. He said, &ldquo;Success is not about the big stories others tell about you, it is the small stories you tell about yourself through your actions.&rdquo;</p>
		<p>At a more mundane level, I often found myself in situations where I had to define the contours of my professional and personal persona to close-knit friends and family. A significant part of my discourse with budding mental health professionals invariably revolves around how family and friends treat you, and how they negotiate to access your professional skills.</p>
		<p>As a professional counselor, I often find myself in tricky situations with relatives, friends and other personal relations. Way back, as my family and friends learned that I was a practicing counselor, during informal meetings, get-togethers and other social events, I would find myself surrounded by relatives and friends seeking advice on solving their problems. I found that annoying for several reasons. I preferred to keep my professional life separate from personal life. Relatives would relate to me only as a counselor and not as an individual. I looked forward to socialising with them on a personal level. Besides, professional counseling has its own set of tenets that have to be strictly followed.</p>
		<p>To begin with, the atmosphere or the place is not conducive for psychological consultation or counseling - privacy is at stake. Besides, these individuals are not willing to invest time and effort to resolve a problem. They seek ready-made, quick fixes. But the truth is that a problem can be solved, only if the root of the problem is discovered and then addressed. Most often, the tendency among personal relations is that they do not reveal the whole truth about a situation or a crisis. Without complete knowledge, the solution, if any, would be just as incomplete.</p>
		<p>About the same time, I attended a workshop for professionals, where the mentor mentioned that charging even a nominal fee for a service, would make the person accountable and committed. That&rsquo;s when I decided to put an end to this.</p>
		<p>When people approached me, I would say, &ldquo;My brain can find a solution to the problem, only with Vit-M. It is just my limitation. So, let&rsquo;s meet at my clinic to discuss further. &rdquo; I put it across humorously, of course. Over a period, people began to see the truth behind the statement. They would seek advice, but not in open social gatherings. They would come up to me and ask for an appointment. The ruse of Vit-M/consultation fee was not real. What I wished to drive home was the fact that to achieve results, psychological counseling must be conducted in line with a clear and structured process.</p>
		<p>Defining oneself has two far-reaching implications:</p>
		<ol>
			<li>It enhances awareness about one’s own self.</li>
			<li>It establishes clear expectations for others.</li>
		</ol>
		<p>In contemporary times, technology is playing a significant role in defining identity and is often a metaphor for identity itself.</p>
		<p>I was at a school to conduct a session on study skills for tenth standard students. I had asked the students to write down the specific challenges they faced while studying. Common self-observations included distractions, lack of interest, boredom, forgetfulness so on and so forth. One student, Mahesh, had hit the nail on the head. It read, I love Facebook but hate to face the book.</p>
		<p>In tandem, I discussed the numerous challenges teachers faced with the children. While most of it coincided with what the children had said, concern about one particular child stood out. The teachers said that this student was intelligent, a voracious reader, but he was unwilling to study. His grades were poor, despite his intelligence. To my surprise, I discovered that the teachers were talking about Mahesh, the student who had chosen to define his identity with social media and technology. Teachers had noticed a change in him in the last two months. He had appeared highly distracted in class, and he didn&rsquo;t care for his grades anymore.</p>
		<p>I was back in the classroom for the next session, and we were addressing the theme &lsquo;Who am l?&rsquo; I attempted to help the children discover an identity <em>vis-a-vis</em> their education. Having explained that these formative years had an enormous impact on how they would view themselves in years to come, I said, to the class, &ldquo;If we can interest ourselves in books, be it academic or other, we will be able to etch our names as professionals in the book called life; otherwise, we will remain a virtual identity in a virtual space, like for instance, Facebook. The choice is yours.&rdquo;</p>
		<p>Mahesh came to me after the session and said, &ldquo;Ma&rsquo;am, you are right. I have ignored all the books that can help me choose a path in life. A path that can help me mould a future that I can be proud of. But I have ignored them for the unreal Facebook. I know I can turn my life around. You have made me look at my life differently. Thank you so much.&rdquo;</p>
		<p>My journey of dialogues with varied stakeholders on identity brings to mind an open forum on &lsquo;Understanding Generation Gap&rsquo; that I moderated. The audience included people across various age groups and professional backgrounds. The central discussion rested on the younger generation and how to understand and engage with them <em>vis-a-vis</em> technology, gadgets, social media use, gaming and so on. Their obsession with gadgets seemed to be the greatest concern for parents. I said, &lsquo;Technology is a reality. You cannot escape from it. Learn Candy Crush with them, teach them which candies in life are healthy and which candies must be discarded. Sit with them and learn computer skills. Let them teach you. In turn, you teach them life skills. This approach paves for two-way mentoring.&rdquo; The young mother, who had raised this question, said that this was a Eureka moment for her. She had found a way to engage with her teen daughter with less conflict.</p>
		<p>At another workshop for parents, titled &lsquo;Understanding Adolescence&rsquo;, a father expressed that he hadn&rsquo;t bought a smartphone for himself because he didn&rsquo;t know how to use one. As adults we do have an irrational phobia towards any new thing we have to adapt to, in this case, he feared to learn how to use this new technology. His son took advantage of this fear and ridiculed him often.</p>
		<p>Each time the father asked his son to study or do a chore, the son would get back at him saying, &ldquo;You are not smart! You can&rsquo;t use a smartphone!&rdquo;</p>
		<p>The father said that somewhere deep inside, he believed what his son said. He would retreat into a shell. The pain was apparent in his voice.</p>
		<p>I asked, &ldquo;How do you define &lsquo;smartness&rsquo;? Smartness cannot be limited to the ability to use smartphones alone?&rdquo;</p>
		<p>&ldquo;I know there are several dimensions to smartness and intelligence. But I lack this skill,&rdquo; he said.</p>
		<p>I finally said, &ldquo;Smartphones don&rsquo;t make anyone smart. Smart people use smartphones smartly.&rdquo;</p>
		<p>The outcome of this dialogue was that the parent group understood that rather than reacting emotionally to children&rsquo;s opinions and ideas, redefining their ideas to reveal flaws in thinking patterns and views would make children sensitive and mature. With widening generation gaps, it&rsquo;s essential for parents to recreate their identity, by harnessing experience, which children lack, but at the same time be open to accommodate their viewpoints.</p>
		<p>The values that we imbibe in our children as parents are the basis on which they build their identity. As part of my project to understand how people define themselves during periods of adversity and challenge, I had interviewed several people. One lady&rsquo;s grit and courage stood out. While most of us would blame our destiny or blame someone else for our misery, here was a woman who had fought her way all through life, be it, retaliating against eve-teasing in college, marrying the man of her choice or successfully running a training academy and then relocating to another country.</p>
		<p>What really gave her the courage to stand up despite hurdles and opposition at every step? Her answer was, &ldquo;My father had once told me: If you are right, then fight for it. If you are wrong, then submit. I have lived by that principle." Simple advice moulded her personality. She has single-handedly shaped her destiny. Despite making wrong decisions, she didn&rsquo;t cower. She owned responsibility and set it right. She faced numerous hurdles but didn&rsquo;t get bogged down by them. An ordinary life transformed by extraordinary strength!</p>
		<p>Hence, defining self and the many roles, we play in life, and its connection to the larger society is a life-long journey of deep churning, joy and contentment. These experiences have given more profound meaning to my life and work. It has ushered in a sense of calmness and contentment in me. How do I define myself? What is my identity? Can I go beyond the name, age, sex, nationality, religion, race, education and profession? Fundamental questions as these do plague us at some point in our lives. In fact, they must plague us and make us restless. How else would we grow? Answers to these questions are essential to define our interactions and relationships with others and with our own selves. Identity is not a huge monolithic structure. Identity is a sum total of various components related to our individual selves and the environmental elements we interact with. Identity is not fixed either. It is in a state of flux. It must be redefined with altering perspectives and life situations.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
