<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Powerful Dialogues</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-006">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">The Model of PD</h1>
		<p>"The word &lsquo;dialogue&rsquo; is rooted in the Greek words &lsquo;dia&rsquo; (through) and &lsquo;logos&rsquo; (words), in the broader sense, it implies, to make meaning through an exchange of words. The shared understanding of &lsquo;words&rsquo; and their significance is one of the most important cultural factors that bind us as a community.</p>
		<p>I believe that the journey of a &lsquo;Dialogue&rsquo; to a &lsquo;Powerful Dialogue&rsquo; is sacred. A journey facilitated by &lsquo;Intent&rsquo; and &lsquo;Hope&rsquo; on the part of the stakeholders. The chief stakeholders being the &lsquo;sender&rsquo; and &lsquo;receiver&rsquo; (sender implies counselor/trainer/therapist and receiver implies counseled/trainee/client).</p>
		<section class="level2 numbered" id="id-006.01">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Intent</h2>
			<p>Intent is the purpose with which both sender and receiver enter into a dialogue. ‘Intent’ of a Dialogue binds the sender and receiver. The catalyst that transforms a mere dialogue into a Powerful Dialogue is the intent to facilitate transformation on the part of the sender and the intent to change/transform/evolve on the part of the receiver.</p>
			<p>When the &lsquo;purpose&rsquo; of a Dialogue is to &lsquo;facilitate&rsquo; the experience of &lsquo;introspection&rsquo; that can lead to &lsquo;transformation&rsquo;, it becomes therapeutic and adds a new dimension to one&rsquo;s personality.</p>
			<p>Sincerity of purpose distinguishes Powerful Dialogue from a dialogue, conversation, argument, debate and discussion. Every verbal exchange carries implicit or explicit purposes - to prove oneself right, to contradict, to persuade, to manipulate, to malign, to coerce among others. <strong>Sincerity of purpose</strong> brings authenticity to the whole conversation, and thus it becomes an experiential journey.</p>
			<p>The intent of, &ldquo;I will change your life&rdquo; is a false and patronising approach. I strongly believe that nobody can change another&rsquo;s life. The only genuine intent is, &ldquo;I can assist you in change&rdquo;. I firmly believe that it is the sacred moral responsibility of the speaker to help create a transformative journey for the receiver.</p>
		</section>
		<section class="level2 numbered" id="id-006.02">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Hope</h2>
			<p>The receiver may or may not be equipped with the intent to change, or may or may not believe in the possibility or scope for change. This is where the sender has to create ‘hope’ in the receiver that change is possible. </p>
			<p>Hope implies a certain amount of despair, suffering or perseverance &mdash; i.e., believing that a better or positive outcome is possible even when there is evidence to the contrary. Hope contrasts with wishing, dreaming and desiring which imply more urgent ego claims and controls aimed at particular objects and goals. Hope is an arduous search for a future good of some kind that is realistically possible but not yet visible. Hope is tied with imagination - imagining that what we really need is possible, though difficult.</p>
			<p>Hoping is a realistic and adaptive response to extreme stress or crisis in which the person acquires a patient and confident surrender to uncontrollable, transcendent forces. However, Hope is not initiated and sustained by erasing emotions of fear and anxiety, but it integrates the genuine threats and dangers that exist into the proposed strategies to subsume them. Hope brings reality into sharp focus. Hope incorporates fear into the process of rational deliberation and tempers it.</p>
			<p>Hope helps transcend experiences of despair, distress and pain. When the receiver believes or is convinced or committed to hope, the sender and receiver unknowingly create a path for the receiver. In doing so, the sender also traverses the path of self-discovery.</p>
			<p>Hope is, therefore, a thin thread which binds the person till the last moment to not give up. When you create hope, you create a series of positive vibes and energy in the person to do things. Hope creates a set of possibilities, possibilities of a beautiful world, of peace and happiness and ultimately leads to faith.</p>
			<p>Armed with hope and positivity, the receiver is empowered to find hitherto unknown paths and solutions. Once Intent and Hope are articulated and created, the situation is most conducive for transformation.</p>
			<p>Intent and hope:</p>
			<ul>
				<li>Establish a mutual understanding</li>
				<li>Create an open environment</li>
				<li>Establish mutual trust</li>
				<li>Establish mutual respect and acceptance</li>
				<li>Build awareness about the sincerity of purpose</li>
			</ul>
			<p>With hope, the intent to transform is also created in the receiver. The Intent of the receiver is a precondition for change since change is a profoundly personal experience.</p>
		</section>
		<section class="level2 numbered" id="id-006.03">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Personal Journey for Both</h2>
			<p>The sender can only create a favourable environment, but the journey of transformation has to be undertaken by the receiver only. </p>
			<p>One of the most significant insights that I had during the journey of this book is that I, as a sender, have myself experienced transformation with each receiver. The journey of dialogue to powerful dialogue is analogous with the journey of internal transformation of both the speaker and receiver.</p>
		</section>
		<section class="level2 numbered" id="id-006.04">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Tool of Introspection</h2>
			<p>You would have noticed that each receiver including myself went deeper to understand oneself than understand others. Each receiver also found resolution through a better understanding of oneself. Each Powerful Dialogue had personal implications for the receiver. How did this happen? We used the most powerful tool available to mankind - INTROSPECTION.</p>
			<p>There is always an element of introspection, learning and realisation, however small it may be. Thus, the person is the content. The content or tool that sparks change is found within each of us. Harnessing this internal energy is the key to change.</p>
		</section>
		<section class="level2 numbered" id="id-006.05">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Context</h2>
			<p>Is Introspection sufficient? Or do we need more? Introspection invariably happens in a context, it arises out of the specificities of this context. A Powerful Dialogue can be replicated in different contexts, but the outcomes may vary. One of the reasons why many dialogues fail to become powerful is the gross mismatch between intent, context and dialogue, be it organisational change or individual change and the lack of a shared understanding of the same between the sender and receiver.</p>
			<p>Sometimes metaphors, quotes, idioms, proverbs or words randomly thrown at us can take on the mantle of becoming Powerful Dialogue. However, transformation can occur only when a dialogue touches a deep chord inside the receiver, and it is in this cord that we find a new perspective or a new meaning. This leads to increased awareness of the intent and hope is generated. The dialogue then takes on power and becomes a powerful dialogue.</p>
		</section>
		<section class="level2 numbered" id="id-006.06">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Moment of Epiphany</h2>
			<p>Once the relationship of the intent, context and dialogue is articulated clearly, then the dialogue begins and it is in this process that one or both participants experience the WOW or FROZEN moment of self-realisation.</p>
		</section>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
