<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>Nagpur Ashram</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body>
<H1/>
<H3/>
<H3/>
<table>
<tr>
<td>
<strong>Published by: </strong>
</td>
<td>
<strong>Prism Books Pvt. Ltd. </strong>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<TD/>
<td># 1865, 32nd Cross, 10th Main, BSK IInd Stage </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<TD/>
<td>Bengaluru-560 070. Phone : 080-26714108 </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<TD/>
<td>Telefax : 080-26713979, e-mail : info@prismbooks.com </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<em>Also at </em>
</td>
<TD/>
</tr>
</table>
<p><strong>Chennai : </strong>Tel : 044-42867509, e-mail : prismchennai@prismbooks.com <strong>Hyderabad: </strong>Tel : 040-23261828, e-mail:prismhyderabad@prismbooks.com <strong>Kochi : </strong>Tel : 0484-4000945, e-mail : prismkochi@prismbooks.com <strong>Kolkata : </strong>Tel : 033-24297957, e-mail : prismkolkata@prismbooks.com</p>
<h5>© <strong>2012, Prism Books Pvt. Ltd. </strong></h5>
<p>Pages : xxiv + 241 Frist Edition : 1997 Second Edition : july 2012 Price :</p>
<p>250/-Printed on : 70 GSM Maplitho Cover design : Varunish, Jaipur DTP : Chandana Jaikumara</p>
<p>No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording or any information storage and retrieval system, without premission in writing from the publisher.</p>
<table>
<tr>
<th>ISBN </th>
<th>: </th>
<th>978-81-7286-725-6 </th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
</th>
<td>Printed at </td>
<td>: </td>
<td>Sreeranga Printers Pvt. Ltd </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>• • • • • </th>
<TD/>
<TD/>
<td>Bengaluru </td>
</tr>
</table>
<h3>
<em>We make a living by what we get; We make a life by what we give </em>
</h3>
<h3>— Sir Winston Churchill </h3>
<H2/>
<p>I dedicate these fifty ‘Soul Stories’ to a <em>Management Monk</em>, Mr RH Khwaja – my co-author of the book ‘The Acrobatics of Change’ – a bureaucrat with entrepreneurial spirit, a paradoxical blend of <em>personal humility</em> and <em>professional will</em>, the semblance of ‘level 5’ leadership. Not just a plain turnaround of SCCL, but infusing the spirit of ‘Singarenians’ based on the philosophy of ‘One Family, One Vision, One Mission’ by far the most challenging contribution that he could do with ease.</p>
<p>As I see through the eye of my soul, his present position ‘Union Tourism Secretary’, Government of India, is just the beginning of his career – greater heights await his arrival! The nation can never afford the luxury of witnessing such people ever retiring.</p>
<p>
<strong>Moid Siddiqui </strong>
</p>
<p>
<em>It takes time to grow in wisdo</em>
<em>m </em>
</p>
<p>A Management Monk parts us for the heavens above, leaving behind his footprints on the sands of time — for our guidance!</p>
<p>I knew Janab Abid Hussain Saheb whilst in <em>primary school</em>. I met him for the first time, in a small town</p>
<p>Kalwakurty (Tehsil), district Mehboob Nagar in Andhra Pradesh. It was the beginning of his career – he was a young, dashingly handsome, fair complexion person with a passion that was contagious. If I recall correctly, he was then the Deputy Collector, probably the year was 1950. My Father was a <em>Tehsildar</em> and he was directly reporting to Janab Abid Hussain. But he always called may father, ‘Ghani Saheb’, respectfully so, as my father was elder to him.</p>
<p>As time elapsed, we maintained contact traditionally through letters. When I would visit New Delhi, I would call upon him and he would greet me most warmly. He always was affectionate to me. After each meeting I had the feeling that I was returning, holding the tablets of wisdom from him. I still remember that the news of his selection as Indian</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">vii</span>
<SPAN class="en">i </span>
</p>
<p>Ambassador to the US came to him when I was taking evening tea sitting with him on the lawns of his house in New Delhi.</p>
<p>The first dew drop of management wisdom came to me, not from a Management Guru but from a bureaucrat</p>
<p>— Dr. Abid Hussain. The year was 1988, in one of the seminars I was attending in Hyderabad I met Abid Saheb and Dr. V Krishnamurthy, who were both speakers at the event. During the tea break, Dr. Abid Hussain introduced me to Dr. V Krishnamurthy (who was also intimately known to me). Dr. Krishnamurthy smiled and told him, “Abid Saheb, I know him better for I even know his brother.” Dr. Abid Hussain, known for his wit, retorted, “I know him best then - for I even know his father.” Sensitizing the delicacy of the situation I hurriedly told Dr. Krishnamurthy, “Abid Saheb knows my father because my father was working under him.” Dr. Abid Hussain didn’t like my usage of the word, ‘under’, correcting me immediately, “Moid, never use this word <em>under</em> again – Ghani Saheb (my father) was working with me, and he was my colleague.”</p>
<p>Thus I gained wisdom from one of the greatest <em>Management Monks</em>. Over 25 years have passed, and I have never used the word ‘Under’ for my colleagues.</p>
<p>When I authored my first book ‘The Brave New Manager’ he wrote the Foreword, predicting its success. Later,</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">i</span>
<SPAN class="en">x </span>
</p>
<p>this book was adjudged as the best book of the year 199596 by AIMA (All India Management Association) – his prophecy came true.</p>
<p>He left this temporal world on 21<span><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-">st<\/a><\/sup></span> June 2012, leaving etched in me the memories of his noble thoughts that he shared with me whenever we met – that which I shall treasure most fondly. I pray for him – May Allah grant a place in the heaven to this noble soul (<em>Ameen</em>)!</p>
<p>
<strong>Moid Siddiqui </strong>
</p>
<p>
<em>Death gives us sleep, eternal youth, and immortality </em>
</p>
<h3>- Jean Paul </h3>
<H2/>
<p>There lived a celebrated Chinese poet called Tao Yuanming during 365-427 AD. A minor official in an obscure district by profession, he thought little of high rank. Once when a senior inspector was on an official tour of the district, the poet’s subordinates advised him to dress up for the occasion and pay the inspector a courtesy call. On hearing this piece of advice he said with a sigh, “I cannot for five packs of rice bow before a country bumpkin and a petty man.” And as the anecdote goes, the same day Tao quit!</p>
<p>Now, someone may find him silly for valuing his dignity and refusing to do what must strike many of us as the practical thing – everyone does it! But the point is that he did not consider his material well-being more important than his sense of right and wrong.</p>
<p>The question remains. Ask yourself, <em>Is it worth breaking your back for five packs of rice? </em></p>
<p>As a matter of fact, simple and fundamental value-laced and normative issues elude most of humanity (most of the time). The sources of the consistent constancy of entrepreneurial concern about the bottom line are not hard to discern. But any serious analysis would restore the value of values, even in business matters. Money as the be-all and</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">xi</span>
<SPAN class="en">i </span>
</p>
<p>end-all is not an optimal strategy even for a businessman. Bereft of values, we would be losers overall, <em>if one takes a larger perspective. </em></p>
<p>What is success to you? How do you measure yourself with your peers? It is anybody’s guess, that you will admit you would generally equate success with material well-being, if not outright with your level on the ladder of hierarchy. Nor are you likely to regard someone as having done well in life unless he has the usual material emblems to exhibit – car, bungalow, country club membership and a plethora of tags to demonstrate name and fame.</p>
<p>And the business world is no different. The dictum, <em>No business without show-business </em>is not quite an unpragmatic one<em>. </em>We accept the ladder-climbers as our superiors and do not match relevance to their intellectual integrity or dignity. Thus Truth escapes us. As a sage once said, If we turn our back to the sun, we see mere shadow.</p>
<p>Success is surely more meaningful than material wellbeing. In fact, material well-being should be the by-product of success, brought about by a strong sense of ethics. Selflessness, consideration for others, honesty and other virtues form the moral foundations of a society. Dignity and pride arise from responsibility and not from authority.</p>
<p>And likewise, profitability is to be the by-product of the core-values, which provide the glue that holds an organization together through time. As John Young, former</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">xi</span>
<SPAN class="en">i </span>
</p>
<p>CEO, Hewlett-Packard said in 1992, “We distinguish between core values and practices; the core values do not change, but the practices might. We have also remained clear that profit – as important as it is – not why the Hewlett-Packard Company exists; it exists for more fundamental reasons!”</p>
<p>Values, virtue and wisdom matter a lot in business. It is the intangible and the subtle that create the tangible and the gross. One must develop the third eye to see the gains, which stem from the intangibles – for sure, one cannot see the invisible through the Nelson’s eye. Wisdom is the guiding force behind the core values in practices. “Wisdom without action hath its seat in the mouth, but by means of action it becometh fixed in the heart.” Moid’s book is an attempt to fix wisdom in our hearts.</p>
<p>Wisdom sometimes comes in unexpected flashes. His parables reflect on lessons taken from compassionate and perceptive managers, honest trade-unionists and gracious CEOs. A human resource professional, as he is, he relates true stories of wise managers – he calls them ‘The sagas of management monks’ – monks who taught him some simple and honest truths in management matters. His parables teach what is not taught at a business school. Seven of these parables were already published by American Society for Training & Development (ASTD) and it is a singular recognition of his effort.</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">xi</span>
<SPAN class="en">v </span>
</p>
<p>Moid’s <em>Management Parables </em>have a carry-to-understand flavour. Each parable brings to fore a unique business moral. His management monks are his peers, juniors, directors, CEOs and also trade-union leaders. He breaks myth. His presentation is forthright, honest and transparent. The real value of this work lies in these qualities.</p>
<p>I have known Moid for some time now. The profileeditor of Economic Times called him a poet-manager. He is the recipient of the Rajiv Gandhi Memorial National Award for Excellent Manager, 1995, and winner of the Best Manager Gold Award, 1996, instituted by International Greenland Society. I fondly remember his earlier work ‘The Brave New Manager’ which was honoured as the best Management book of 1996 by DMA of All India Management Association. I see a spark in him.</p>
<p>Life is a learning process. One must learn and share his learning with others. Those who know must contribute. If they do not, the guilt is unpardonable. Chanakya puts across appropriately: <em>More harm is caused to society by the inaction of good men than by the misdeeds of evil men. </em></p>
<p>This book demonstrates the art of unclipping one’s wings and that of scaling new heights.</p>
<p>I wish Moid the very best in the years to come.</p>
<h3>
<strong>ABID HUSSAIN </strong>
</h3>
<p>Former Indian Ambassador to the USA</p>
<h3>
<em>Unless a life is lived for others it is not worthwhile </em>
</h3>
<h3>— Mother Teresa </h3>
<H2/>
<p>During the good old days in China, wisdom was considered as the most important and fundamental quality of a ruler. Monks – the spiritual gurus – were expected by the subjects to show the rulers the right path of wisdom when they went astray. The monks used to convey their message of wisdom by writing parables. Unlike Socrates, the monks were never asked to drink hemlock.</p>
<p>My previous book on Management Parables was published in 1997, wherein I collated the short stories of wisdom from my days serving several Indian public sector companies. These were my true experiences at BHEL, NHPC, CCI, HMT and BEML that ranged from moments of frustrations to some alluring while other fleeting moments of sagacity.</p>
<p>Many liked these hair-raising parables for I chose to sheaf the wheat from the stalk, by portraying those that illustrated the path of the monks. The book did well I presume, for each chapter was short enough to read and long enough to learn. Fifteen years hence, in April 2012, my associate and friend S Pranesh, Managing Director, Prism Books, suggested that I come up with a fresh book on ‘Soul Stories of Management Monks’ following the technique –</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">xvi</span>
<SPAN class="en">i </span>
</p>
<p><em>writing afresh, yet retaining a few. </em>What you hold in your hands is my compliance to his recipe.</p>
<p>The vision that I had seen fifteen years ago still remains unfulfilled. I had dreamt of a corporate world where competence is subordinated to core values, core strategies to core purpose, knowledge to wisdom, Learning Organizations to Gracious Organizations, and management gurus to management monks. However, during this time frame not much changed for the better, rather things deteriorated. As years rolled by things have gone from bad to worse. All good things seem to be running in reverse gear and brakes have been lifted from those that were once regarded errant. I doubt if this happening by chance.</p>
<p>The propagators of this so called new morality are using social engineering actively to modify the face of the society on this wonderful planet. They are looking for a new world order where freedom overtakes transgressing: Where sin is undone not by virtue but by definition, so it does not remain sin anymore and therefore no one can be slandered as a sinner; Where unethical practices are considered honourable. Thus resulting in a society where ‘all is well’ and no one ever goes astray for the structure itself has been reprogrammed. All this is happening under our nose, but like an ostrich many of us choose to burry our heads in the sands and imagine ‘all is well’.</p>
<p>The greatness of life does not depend on ‘How happy you are’, but on ‘How happy others can be (through you)?’ Corporate world is not an alien, which dwells on another</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">xvii</span>
<SPAN class="en">i </span>
</p>
<p>planet; corporate world is the part of same world, which exists in our world. The business principles are not different in both these entities. They cannot and should not be different than the principles for the guidance of humanity. These are age-old chaste principles, which anchor in space and time from time immemorial. I call these the cosmic principles, which not only touch the heart but also stir the soul. Truth travels through hearts, like light travels though space. This book has come out from my heart and I hope it shall kindle your life – both corporate and personal.</p>
<p>To infuse the freshness into this book a father has taken the assistance of his son, so in a way Feroz Siddiqui, is the invisible co-author of this book, who helped edit my writings to give it a universal flavour.</p>
<p>Your business <em>shubhchintak </em></p>
<h3>
<strong>Moid Siddiqui </strong>
</h3>
<p>reachus@intellects.biz www.intellects.biz</p>
<h3>
<em>By three methods we may learn wisdom: Firstly by reflection, which is noblest; secondly by imitation, which is easiest; and thirdly by experience, which is the bitterest </em>
</h3>
<h3>— Confucius </h3>
<H2/>
<ol>
<li>Be Transparent 1 </li>
<li>Sacred Cheating 7 </li>
<li>Holy Disciplinary Proceedings 11 </li>
<li>‘Discipline’ is not Management’s Franchise 15 </li>
<li>Judicious Discriminating Treatment 19 </li>
<li>Those who live in Glasshouses 23 </li>
<li>Get Back to the Basics 27 </li>
<li>Angling a Whale 33 </li>
<li>Learning Soul Searching 37 </li>
<li>A Pygmy Noble Gesture 41 </li>
<li>Practise – Don’t preach 45 </li>
<li>Ma’ Pays 49 </li>
<li>How Do I Look? 53 </li>
<li>Unforgiving of the Giver 57 </li>
<li>Never Say ‘Under’ Again 61 </li>
<li>Backseat Driving 63 </li>
<li>Clarity in Ambiguity 67 </li>
<li>‘Trust’ and ‘Suspicion’ Don’t jell 71 </li>
<li>The Secret of Excellence 73 </li>
<li>Water Logic 77 </li>
</ol>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">xx</span>
<SPAN class="en">i </span>
</p>
<H2/>
<p>21. How Forcible are Right Words! 83</p>
<p>22. Create a Problem 87</p>
<p>23. Intellectual Integrity 91</p>
<p>24. A Moment of Truth 95</p>
<p>25. Execute ‘Love-bonds’ 99</p>
<p>26. Mein Hoon Na… 105</p>
<p>27. Create out of Mud 111</p>
<p>28. Desiderata 115</p>
<p>29. Mother Wit 119</p>
<p>30. ‘Honesty Jar’ 123</p>
<p>31. Great is One who Imparts knowledge 129</p>
<p>32. Integration of Two Goals 133</p>
<p>33. Survival into Future 137</p>
<p>34. Delayering of a Towering Guru 141</p>
<p>35. Humility is akin to Greatness 145</p>
<p>36. The Quality Oath 149</p>
<p>37. A Film Monk 153</p>
<p>38. The Gordian Knot 157</p>
<p>39. The Clarion Call 161</p>
<p>40. From ‘Brave New Manager’ to ‘Management Monk’ 167</p>
<p>41. Preserve Indian Heritage and Asian Vista 181</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">xxi</span>
<SPAN class="en">i </span>
</p>
<H2/>
<p>42. Listen to your Heart 187</p>
<p>43. Internal Clarity leads to External Solutions 193</p>
<p>44. Nurture the Morality 199</p>
<p>45. Hug your Enemies 205</p>
<p>46. I met a dragon! 211</p>
<p>47. The Great Pied Piper 121</p>
<p>48. Mr Heartware! 225</p>
<p>49. Incredible Credibility 231</p>
<p>50. Follow Your Moral Compass 237</p>
<p>
<em>Sages are spiritual scientists – they discover from within </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>What awaits beyond space and time ? </strong>
</p>
<H2/>
<p>t was early seventies of the preceding century</p>
<p>when I rolled out as a fresh product from a professional institute. I got an interview call from one of the best public sector undertakings in India. I was really excited. I attended the interview. It was going well. I was on top of my performance when a member with murky looks asked.</p>
<p>“What are the functions of a personnel officer in an industrial organization like ours?”</p>
<p>“Motivation, team building, morale building…,” but he interrupted me in a to nip in the bud sort, to say!</p>
<p>“Don’t teach me your bookish knowledge. We want our people to know their job first.”</p>
<p>“A personnel officer must know how to get people of ordinary ability to perform in an extraordinary manner. As Marshall W Fishwick rightly says, <em>the uncommitted life isn’t worth living…</em>” I tried to impress him fearing the losing battle.</p>
<p>“Look, we want someone who knows the procedures, rules, and regulations of the company. Recruitment, verification of antecedents, maintaining personal files, annual confidential reports, what you call ACRs, joining report, bond agreements etc. are the real functions of a personnel officer. Understand the ground realities before you give such theoretical answers in any interview next time.” He gestured indicating that I was no more required. I thanked the committee and left. I could almost hear him whispering to others for wasting the valuable time of the selection committee. Later I came to know that the fellow with the gloomy look was the chief of personnel. I also learnt that the personnel chief had the final say in selection matters.</p>
<p>In a week’s time, I got another opportunity. This time from a company dealing with the management of all the airports of the country – The Airports Authority of India. I thanked God for not getting selected in the earlier interview.</p>
<p>Once again I went confidently, prepared better to grab the offer this time. I was sure, I would make it.</p>
<p>“What are the functions of a personnel officer?” the same question haunted me while I was faring extremely well. I looked at the person. He was sitting at the centre. He must be the Personnel guy, I guessed. But he appeared to be very</p>
<p>bright! He must have done up his face well, I consoled myself. I had already learnt the trick of the (interview) trade. I knew how to satisfy such stone-age creatures.</p>
<p>“Maintaining personal files, Annual Confidential Reports, what we call ‘ACRs’, verification of antecedents, recruitment, designing the advertisements, selection, induction, execution of bonds…” I went on tricking with him but the guy continued looking straight into my eyes as if probing to find something more.</p>
<p>“Manpower planning, MIS, mobility plans, deployment and postings…” I went on with my game play. This time I had slightly changed the stakes by trying the <em>rummy</em> of the <em>basics</em>. But his sharp eyes were expecting more from me.</p>
<p>“Union matters, collective bargaining and negotiations, managing strikes and lock-outs, disciplinary matters…” I went on. This time I used my trump card to catch him on the IR front. I was sure it would click. But the guy was looking for something else. I became nervous. ‘Was he not a personnel guy?’ I started suspecting his credibility. I lost hope. I decided to stop the game.</p>
<p>“And motivation, team building, morale building…” I uttered chewing my words disgustingly apprehending losing the battle once again.</p>
<p>“Young guy, I’m here not to hear such important functions as your last priorities. A personnel officer exists primarily to take care of the morale of people. I am not interested in the long list of rituals you narrated. I thought, you know your profession!” I was not selected. Once again I had earned the wrath of the Personnel guy, though I tried the best trickery.</p>
<p>A couple of months passed. I was once again sitting before another selection committee. Everything was going well until the same question possessed me once again. The guy who wanted me to describe the personnel functions was again the personnel chief, sitting at the centre. I paused to count 10 and decided to ask a frank question.</p>
<p>“Sir, which school of thought do you belong to – old school of thought or modern?” I asked point blank, deciding firmly – no matter if I lost the race.</p>
<p>“What made you ask that?” His smile was suggestive of his frank mind. I narrated my tale without mincing words. He heard me patiently.</p>
<p>“We select you,” he declared looking at his other colleagues to seek their acquiescence. “I liked your openness. I found you are transparent. To my mind, openness and transparency are the best qualities for any manager, let alone the personnel discipline.”</p>
<p>I was amazed wondering which school of thought he belonged to! For sure, he wasn’t talking superficially. He was bestowing upon me an untaught wisdom in the professional institutions. Wisdom unfolded its enchantments:</p>
<p>
<em>Life is distinct from the game of cards. One need not keep his cards too close to his chest to win in life </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Painful memories flapping like invisible wings . . . </strong>
</p>
<H2/>
<p>his episode belongs to the days of my</p>
<p>assignment in BHEL, Bhopal. I was looking after ‘social welfare’ of people. During that assignment I formulated many social welfare policies for my company.</p>
<p>Once I was given an assignment to draft the maiden social security scheme of the company – Death Relief Scheme</p>
<p>– to provide some monetary relief to the widows or the dependants of the deceased employees. I drafted a simple legal-jargon free scheme. It was presented before an empowered committee for its final approval. Believe me – no member of the committee was above the level of manager (For sure, Peter Block had not introduced the philosophy of Empowerment, then), yet empowered.</p>
<p>“Why have you provided a too legalistic clause, in such a simple scheme?” asked S Chatterjee, one of the managers, referring to a particular clause.</p>
<p>“Just as a safe-guard against any cheating,” I soberly gave a justification.</p>
<p>“How much will each member of the scheme lose in case of cheating?” he asked.</p>
<p>“One Rupee,” I promptly replied.</p>
<p>“How much will the beneficiary get in case of cheating?” He shot another question.</p>
<p>“Twenty thousand Rupees,” I coolly replied.</p>
<p>“What do you think – who has the chances to cheat?” His sparkling eyes were biting me.</p>
<p>“Wife… I mean, widow…, widow of a deceased employee.” I don’t know why I so badly fumbled!</p>
<p>“Then, I sincerely wish,” after a pause he told, “Let the widow cheat.” He went on, “Let the widow get Rs 20,000 even by cheating – after all what we lose is only a buck per person! Why are you Personnel fellows so chicken hearted! Delete the legal clause – let there be some purposeful ambiguity to a widow’s advantage. Let her cheat all of us – after all she has lost her everything.” I found as if he is feeling widow’s agony in his heart; as if his heart was beating for such ill-fated widows.</p>
<p>His words were harshly beating my eardrums. Suddenly I came out of the legal slumber of my profession. There is a distinct difference between HRD Systems and criminal penal codes – we can’t equate our human assets with the hard-core criminals, I realized. The magnanimity of management lies</p>
<p>in compassion. Sometimes ambiguity in system is desirable. Wisdom dawned upon me.</p>
<p>This single incident has changed my professional approach and helped develop a positive perspective towards human aspects. This was the turning point in my HR outlook.</p>
<p>
<em>I realized, it is noble to err on the side of mercy </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Will this continue till the sun rises in the west ? </strong>
</p>
<H2/>
<p>look back to the late seventies of twentieth century.</p>
<p>A theft had taken place in the BHEL staff canteen. The cook, it was reported, had stolen 12 <em>laddus</em> (sweets). The general manager (Personnel) had ordered a <em>prima facie</em> inquiry, intending to take stern action against the pilferage.</p>
<p>I was called by my boss, O W Prahalad, who was junior in hierarchy to the general manager (Personnel).</p>
<p>“I assign this task to you,” he told me handing over the instructions. “But I want you to set an example in the history of disciplinary cases. You shall initiate ‘holy’ disciplinary proceedings against him.” He paused. “Find out what made the cook steal the <em>laddus</em>. Does he have too many children? Are they half-fed? Perhaps his beloved young daughter demanded sweets from him – there could be many causes!”</p>
<p>He gave me a 10-rupee note. “Take some sweets along with you for his children,” he said. “I am sure they need it.</p>
<p>Oh, and take care that you do not embarrass the cook by too much probing. Let him not feel too small. Try to rehabilitate him psychologically.”</p>
<p>I was looking at the great soul – my boss. Tears blinked in my eyes. Once again wisdom was imparted to me:</p>
<p>
<em>Some holy methods are much more effective than mechanical legal proceedings </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>Discipline is the bridge between goals and accomplishment </em>
</p>
<p>– Jim Rohn</p>
<p>
<strong>Strive to understand more of the perfect invisible principle of life </strong>
</p>
<H2/>
<p>he 1970s were breathing their last. My</p>
<p>assignment in the Himalayas unravelled many a mysterious truth not only relating to nature but also to industrial relations.</p>
<p>On finding a worker guilty of grave misconduct for rioting in a drunken condition at the site of Tissa dam, I decided to place him under suspension pending disciplinary proceedings against him. But the union would not allow me to do so. I knew the delinquent worker was an important <em>office bearer</em> of the recognized union. The pressure was not quite unnatural. The general secretary insisted to give him just one week’s time, after which he wanted to come and discuss the issue with me. He was playing delaying tactics to gain time, I was sure. It was a time worn practice. I thought of neglecting his request and going ahead. I did not believe in negotiating disciplinary matters with the union. They too knew my approach. But somehow I decided to wait for a</p>
<p>week – it was perhaps my sixth sense, which persuaded me to suspend the suspension.</p>
<p>But seven days didn’t really pass. It was just the 5<span><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-">th<\/a><\/sup></span> day. I got a call over wireless fromTissa. It was the general secretary of the union. He thanked me first for cooperating with him. I thought I knew what he was going to say next. But he didn’t say what I expected. He said, I could go ahead with the suspension. I just couldn’t believe. I didn’t think it appropriate to probe further. My purpose was served. Placing an <em>office bearer </em>of the recognized union under suspension would provide a sure deterrent. I issued the suspension orders.</p>
<p>Next day the truth was unfastened by the vigilance. It appears the general secretary conducted the <em>prima facie </em>inquiries himself at the work spot on behalf of his union and was convinced of the commission of misconduct by his most trusted <em>office bearer.</em> He first dropped him from the executive committee in an emergency meeting and then only allowed the management to take the disciplinary action against him. “An office bearer with a <em>prima facie</em> charge of rioting in a drunken condition cannot continue in the position of honour,” he proclaimed and accordingly a resolution to that effect was passed by the executive committee. The worker who was suspended by me was no longer an <em>office bearer</em> of the union.</p>
<p>‘The Himalayas are really the place where dwell the Saints and Sufis’ I realized in my hearts. The mystery that shrouded over the issue for five days unfolded by the union by its own conduct. A new wisdom came to me with the shining sunrays peeping through the range of mountains:</p>
<p>
<em>Unions can also muster courag</em>
<em>e </em>
<em>and set examples of disciplin</em>
<em>e </em>
<em>ever found in management books</em>
<em>. </em>
<em>Discipline is not the management’</em>
<em>s </em>
<em>monopoly alone. Union</em>
<em>s </em>
<em>can also franchise i</em>
<em>t </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Disagreement – the shortest cut between two minds </strong>
</p>
<H2/>
<p>ational Hydro-electrical Power Corporation</p>
<p>(NHPC) was a strange place. We didn’t understand each other’s language though everyone spoke English. The problem was of <em>wavelength</em>. I used to talk what I had learnt from the pages of modern management. What they practiced were the procedures. It was sickening to perform rituals. Every letter necessarily to start with the phrase, “I am directed to say…” Even the letter of dismissal would have a prelude; “The competent authority is pleased to terminate your services…”</p>
<p>A five-day cricket test shrinks to s single day; the test match can be played overnight; the red ball can become white; the white uniform can gain colours – but no change in their procedures would be brought about. I got vexed.</p>
<p>Under such a desperate condition, once I included my own name in the list of surplus executives of the project. It was not merely to steam out frustration but also to get rid of the ‘wonderland’ with ‘stone-age creatures’.</p>
<p>AS Chatrat, my chief engineer (who was later designated as general manager) didn’t take it so kindly. He called me and said, “I always took the suggestions from you as constructive thoughts from a satisfied officer. Today, after seeing this note of yours, I have sensed for the first time that you have jumped the fence. In future, I will keep in mind that the suggestion has come from a frustrated mind. Obviously, a frustrated officer cannot be judged on the face value!”</p>
<p>I shivered in my spine. Not because the weather was cold, nor out of fear. It was a thrill of a strange kind. The one whom I took as a stone-age person, came out with a thought that I had never read in any modern management book. His management philosophy unravelled a fresh wisdom:</p>
<p>
<em>Satisfaction and frustration are diagonally opposite – to balance, the treatment should vary </em>
</p>
<p>
</p>
<p>– John Burroughs</p>
<H2/>
<p>n the Himalayas, biting cold begins from</p>
<p>September. It is during this month that the orchards on the mountainous heights bear fruit – apples, cherries, apricots, plums and berries! The blood red fruits, cold waves, swaying pines, snow clad peaks, picturesque and strikingly beautiful valleys create an environment for wine, dine and dance. It is the season for the cottage distillery owners to mint money. When wine showers from the cloudbursts, a project like ours dealing with more than 10,000 workers, contract labourers, casual and work charged workmen, supervisors and engineers cannot remain alienated; alcoholism at work among the workers used to be the prime concern of the Management during winters.</p>
<p>It was one such intoxicating cold day while in a meeting with the trade union leaders my general manager was discussing the issue impressing upon them the need to counsel workers to desist from such alcoholic indulgence. While listening to the sermon, Surjit Singh Dogra, the President of</p>
<p>the trade union, was mischievously chewing his smile, I could observe. When my general manager went to the extent of saying that he would take stern action with the assistance of the local administrative authorities to see that the drunkards were put behind bars, the president of the union let off his smile and said calmly – “Sir, then who will run the management???”</p>
<p>Naughty grins were struggling to get released and hover on every face, but no one could smirk. Nevertheless, the tone and tenor of general manager’s sermon subdued. The issue of black jack ended with a kneejerk!The sarcastic punch, given with such ease by a simple query, could only come from a person of high wisdom, I realized.</p>
<p><em>Wisdom radiates wisdom</em>; the age-old saying flashed like lightning.</p>
<p>
<em>Those who live in the glasshouse</em>
<em>s </em>
<em>should not throw stones at others</em>
<em>. </em>
<em>The same principle, which underlies workmen, underlie</em>
<em>s </em>
<em>managers and top team</em>
<em>! </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>The illeterate of the 21st century will not be those who cannot read and write, but those who cannot learn, unlearn and relearn </em>
</p>
<p>– Alvin Toffler (Future Shock - 1972)</p>
<p>
<strong>Eastern windows ; Western doors </strong>
</p>
<H2/>
<p>y this time I was two years old in NHPC, with my posting at Baira Suil Project, in the Himalayas.</p>
<p>It was a spine-biting Sunday morning. I was in a relaxed mood while I got a call from AS Chatrath, my general manager. He used to live in one portion of the posh guesthouse, built on the top of a hill. Our township was in the valley below. He wanted me to join for breakfast. I had only two options – either to call for a jeep from the transport department or to climb the heights following the zigzag shortcuts. I decided to walk.</p>
<p>During the breakfast, the silence was to the extent of a lull – that was indicative of a brewing storm. Over hot coffee, my boss broke the silence asking me point blank, “What is wrong with you?” Though I was ready to face stormy weather after a lull, I wasn’t ready for such a blunt and brute question.</p>
<p>“I haven’t understood you, Sir,” I replied politely and a bit diplomatically to gain some time to count 10 in allowing my ‘A’ – the ‘Adult’ – to emerge from my frightened ‘C’ (Child ego-state) and also to compute a rational answer.</p>
<p>“I am referring to your note which you attached to the manpower plan of the project,” he told me. Now I remembered. I had included my name in the mobility plan for elsewhere postings. I did this in frustration as I was feeling suffocated in the public sector, which was managed like a government project. Before formation of NHPC, Baira Suil Hydroelectricity Project was management by Central Public Works Department (CPWD).Though this project was placed under the control of newly formed public sector, – NHPC</p>
<p>– all the obsolete government practices continued.</p>
<p>“Are you not happy with me?” he asked politely.</p>
<p>“No sir, there is nothing like that…”</p>
<p>“Then why do you want to go? You know well, how much I like your work. You also know, how much I trust you. To be frank with you, I need you.”</p>
<p>I was totally moved. I just broke down – the ice was broken in real sense. I explained to him how I was taken as an odd-man-out in the total project management governed</p>
<p>by the FRs, SRs, CPWD Manuals, etc. (Fundamental Rules, Service Rules of Central government and Central Public Works Department Manuals). All these did not jell well with the concepts I was taught. These rules were meant to manage the government machinery. They belonged to bureaucracy not to entrepreneurship. And that modern and scientific management techniques did not approve of such bureaucratic practices. Here he stopped me. He looked straight in my eyes and said, “I too was a young and energetic manager a couple of decades ago. I too tried to change the world. But the world didn’t change. Slowly I changed myself. Today you talk of modern management, scientific management and arouse a strange feeling in me that I have become obsolete. After a couple of decades, you will grow old like me and sit in this chair. And some Young Turk will sit before you – as you are sitting before me. Then, he will tell you – he will tell you with more force than you told me today – ‘Sir, you have gone obsolete’. He will screech, ‘your knowledge and your approach and your thoughts and your practices and your blah blah... do not conform with the modern management’. Believe me, you will not relish the episode. What you say modern management today, will not be of any relevance tomorrow.”</p>
<p>There was a silence – a deep silence of the Himalaya’s winter heights.</p>
<p>On returning, after a strange compromise of <em>old</em> and <em>modern</em> thoughts between the two of us, for the first time I realized the unclothed truth, everything, which is modern today will antiquate tomorrow. I couldn’t be an exception to such a natural phenomenon. As regards getting old, I was not perturbed as aging was a process that would take its own course without an exception. But I was not mentally ready to reconcile with the fact that in the course of time my knowledge would get antiquated and I would become obsolete.</p>
<p>What I am today is the result of the wisdom that dawned upon me at that unforgettable moment of time – <em>in the course of time my knowledge would get antiquated and I would become obsolete</em>. I decided, it would not happen to me. I started reading books – both modern and ancient. During those days I wrote my first article on management theme.</p>
<p>Later, when I entered the age of computer, I asked my son, Feroz, what was the latest computer to buy from Singapore and he advised me to go for Apple. I put my leg on the chest of my first Macintosh an ibook. Learning not just a new operating system but new applications too. I fell in love with the Mac and there was no looking back. Later I added an ‘iMac’ and then a ‘MacBook Pro’ to my ‘modern’ arsenal. No good book ever escaped my attention. I developed</p>
<p>authorship skills so that my appetite for reading and learning increases per force.</p>
<p>Good or bad, I am the product of just one incident – had my general manager not dawned that wisdom upon me, yes, I would have become obsolete like the rest. The secret of my success lies in ‘getting back to basics’, not sometimes, always!</p>
<p>
<em>Get back to basics is the only solution not to be a bygone phenomenon! </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>If you don’t risk, you risk even more </strong>
</p>
<H2/>
<p>he Himalayas have nostalgic values for me. I</p>
<p>found the valleys the native place of wisdom. I do not refer here the Saints or Sufis. I talk about the sagacity that came to me from the management monks.</p>
<p>I recall. It was an unprecedented winter when the fury of weather brought destruction in the valley where I was working in a hydro-electrical project during the mid seventies. One of our sites – Tissa Dam – was totally cut off by landslides. It was just a chance that the senior most person available at the head quarters in the valley for taking crucial decisions at such an hour of test was HC Bharadawaj, Superintending Engineer (equivalent to manager or senior manager in the manufacturing organizations).</p>
<p>The very first step the HC Bharadwaj took was that he shifted his place of operation from his carpeted wellstructured and safe room to the wireless control-room, which</p>
<p>was prone to land slides. This jacked up the morale of the project people.</p>
<p>“Most of the workers with their families are rendered homeless,” the first problem was posed to him on wireless from the Tissa Dam site.</p>
<p>“Convert all the official complexes into rehabilitation centres,” Bharadwaj gave the decision without any hesitation.</p>
<p>“The grief stricken families need medicines,” another problem was posed to him, next day.</p>
<p>“Take medicines from the project medical stores even for those villagers who are not eligible,” he took another bold decision.</p>
<p>“The store is locked. The pharmacist is not traceable for past two days.”</p>
<p>“Break open the medical store,” was the precise and firm reply, demonstrating that the executive exists to make sensible exception to general rules.</p>
<p>“There is no improvement in the weather conditions. Our ration is exhausting fast. We are afraid, children may die of hunger.” The problem was posed to him on the 3<span><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-">rd<\/a><\/sup></span> day.</p>
<p>“Take the ration from the officers’ houses who are away on leave or tour.”</p>
<p>“Their houses are locked,” the voice was shaky, obviously not owing to piercing winter.</p>
<p>“Break open the doors,” the manager coolly gave the fearless decision by breaking all the norms of management and civil administration.</p>
<p>“It will be an illegal act.” The voice on the wireless was nervous.</p>
<p>“Don’t bother about legality, I take full responsibility. I repeat – break open the locks and take all the ration available from these houses.” His orders were absolutely clear – he didn’t mince words nor gave any pause to count till ten.</p>
<p>Later, the manager also organized aerial food drop by seeking the assistance from the Air Force, an action much beyond his delegation of powers.</p>
<p>Under the ‘play-safe ‘ strategic environment, widespread in most of the companies today, the sagas of professional bravery of this kind prior to Peter Block’s contraption of his empowered managers, simply appear to be tales out of a comic book.</p>
<p>The wholesome wisdom which came to me was simple but unique:</p>
<p>
<em>Unusual situations can b</em>
<em>e </em>
<em>dealt only with unusual decisions</em>
<em>. </em>
<em>One can’t fish a whale by an angling rod</em>
<em>. </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Stiff and unbending is the disciple of death; The gentle and yielding is the disciple of life </strong>
</p>
<H2/>
<p>y colleague (finance chief ) and I were</p>
<p>trusted lieutenants of our general manager, Joseph Polycarp. Whenever we made recommendations, he would blindly sign for any proposal.</p>
<p>We once sent in a sealed cover, a proposal to fix a guy who was always trying to trick with our general manager. We knew he had carried false tales to the corporate office against the general manager. Several times he had tried to misuse his rapport with the union chaps against him. Once he had gone to the extent of dividing the unit on community basis. He took our general manager as his <em>bete noire.</em> He was too cunning to be caught on a wrong foot. But, it was a question of time. We could at last trap him in a fraudulent case. We were sure, our general manager, would hug both of us for demonstrating a gesture of rare loyalty towards him.</p>
<p>We were quite disappointed, when Polycarp called both of us only to recite a sermon of benevolence. After showering splendid sagacity, he concluded:</p>
<p>“Remember one thing as you grow in hierarchy – learn to show more grace and shower mercy. Acquire magnanimity; be prudent and judicious. Position grants you power. Power belongs to God. It takes you closer to Him. Learn to be a Godly person. Reward good work; forget the petty sins. If God were to punish the sinners, none of us would exist. It is always safer to err on the side of mercy. Do your own soul searching, before suggesting to punish others.”</p>
<p>Scores of years have rolled by but his words always make a blaring echo in my mind whenever a matter pertaining to reward or punishment arises. The wisdom that he launched upon us was synonymous with the adage:</p>
<p>
<em>Don’t forget little kindness; don’t remember small faults </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>True nobility is exempt from fear </em>
</p>
<p>– Marcus Cicero</p>
<p>
<strong>Achieve greatness in little things </strong>
</p>
<H2/>
<p>ement factories are normally located at</p>
<p>Godforsaken places, near lime stone deposits in extremely non-friendly dry terrain. As personnel chief in a cement company. I was once posted at a remote place, where people from the city appeared bizarre. Visits of senior people from the corporate office always used to attract crowds – unions, associations, backward classes, ex-servicemen, contract labour unions, casuals, village <em>sarpanch</em>, government officials and a horde of such people expecting to meet the corporate bureaucrats for one reason or the other. We used to plan strategies to avoid the crowd without hurting their feelings.</p>
<p>On receiving a telex about our chairman’s visit to the factory, our general manager called an emergent meeting to plan the various arrangements. One of the strategic decisions was to keep the crowd away. I was given this ticklish task. I</p>
<p>started working on it. The first thing I did was to keep his programme confidential. The Security was given proper instructions to guard the premises and so on.</p>
<p>When Col S P Wahi, our chairman reached the guesthouse he called me and said, “Please ensure that anyone who wants to meet me is allowed to do so.” Everyone looked at him, astonishingly. It was a real puzzle to me. I didn’t know how to explain to him the problem that he was inviting for himself.</p>
<p>However, I had no option. People began coming and I went on disturbing him. Not once did he raise his eyebrows nor show annoyance at me. He would often come out of the room himself to talk to them. Sometimes, he would simply greet them and take up the paper for reference. He saw to it that none went back disappointed. He did what he meant. He compromised with his priorities.</p>
<p>The gesture appeared quite ordinary, although it had a tremendous impact on the morale of the people. They felt they were heard. They sensed that the leader had concern for them. They were convinced that they were more important than the meeting-agenda.</p>
<p>The greatness of a leader lies in his approach, I realized. He means what he says and does what he says. He is aware of his actions. He is also aware of the greater impact of such pygmy noble gestures.</p>
<p>The words of Shakespeare brought into wisdom:</p>
<p>
<em>Greatness knows itself</em>
<em>! </em>
<em>Walk your tal</em>
<em>k </em>
</p>
<H2/>
<p>he year was the early 1980s. I was working</p>
<p>in HMT Lamps, Hyderabad, as HR Chief. This unit of HMT had incurred huge losses, to the extent of rupees 270 crore.</p>
<p>Hyderabad is a hot place where there are only two seasons – summers and hotter summers. The hotter summer was too harsh this time. I was sweating even while sitting in the supposedly air conditioned room of my general manager, Pattabiramman. Obviously, the aircon was not on. The heat from the adjacent ‘glass furnace’ was making the room an inferno.</p>
<p>“Are you not well, sir?” I ventured thinking it best to begin indirectly.</p>
<p>“No – I am quite OK.”</p>
<p>“Then… this AC, I mean aircon… I mean…!”</p>
<p>He seemed to enjoy my fumbling, but then he replied.</p>
<p>“Oh, yes. I have taken a vow. The air-condition will be put on only when this business unit at least break evens.” A confident smile hovered on his lips, despite the sweat drops that rolled down his face. “It is just a little sacrifice,” he said. “Unless I restrict my comforts, how can I expect my people to make sacrifices?”</p>
<p>“You are great,” I wanted to say. But my voice was sucked up by my heightened emotions. (I know – hyperemotionality is my weakness.) I was greatly moved by his small but significant gesture of sacrifice as a leader.</p>
<p>In the two remaining years I served there his room’s airconditioner could never be turned on. But the general manager never lost hope. He championed his people. And I enjoyed sweating with him for a pure and purposeful cause.</p>
<p>Like a flash of lightning, the truth seized my heart:</p>
<p>
<em>It is not preaching mantras i</em>
<em>n </em>
<em>bullets on a slideshow, but makin</em>
<em>g </em>
<em>sincere gestures of sacrifice tha</em>
<em>t </em>
<em>makes a leader great. One</em>
<em>, </em>
<em>who doesn’t practice, can’t clai</em>
<em>m </em>
<em>the legitimacy of preaching to other</em>
<em>s </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>For he who has no tranquility there is no concentration </em>
</p>
<p>– Bhagavad Gita</p>
<p>
<strong>Stillness and tranquility set things in order in the universe </strong>
</p>
<H2/>
<p><span><sub>“</sub></span>Sir, run away. They are coming to beat you.”</p>
<p>The frenzied voice of my welfare officer came to me first, much before he entered my room. A fleeting urge to run away came over but I breathed in deeply to demonstrate maturity.</p>
<p>I knew that due to a major friction between the two rival unions, anything could have happened. One union had given the call for celebrating their victory in the fresh elections just in front of the factory gate. The rival unions had used its political sway and managed the orders for prohibition of any gathering in front of the factory premises. The Police had taken charge to deal with the law and order situation. But what I could not understand was, why the hell anybody should come to beat me for a cause not even remotely related to any management action.</p>
<p>But IR (Industrial Relations) doesn’t see logic or reasoning. And when it comes to a crowd, even factors allied to sensibility are influenced by a crowd-mind which knows nothing other than outage.</p>
<p>Before I could realize the danger I was getting into, my room witnessed the fury and frenzy of the crowd. The violent group of workers was shouting slogans and cursing me for quietly sitting in my room watching the <em>tamasha</em> (game), after arranging a <em>Lathi Charge</em> (caning) on the innocent workers. Frankly speaking, I didn’t have any such feedback about the <em>lathi charge</em> by the Police, though my security chap did predict some uproar amongst the rival groups themselves.</p>
<p>My IR sensitivity to such situations gave me an inkling that there was more to the encounter than what met the eye. Behind their overt fury and anger, I could locate some latent fear and nervousness. Amidst their rage and wrath, there seemed to be a quiet invitation for my intervention.</p>
<p>I paused using the Japanese parenthetical <em>ma’</em>, punctuating their anger with my deep silence to understand the situation before initiating any action from my side. I had perhaps understood the situation correctly. Underneath the aggressive approach, there was an yearning in their minds for my supportive intervention to tackle the situation that had just slipped away from their grip. I decided to move along with them.</p>
<p>On reaching out I found the entire commotion happening within the factory premises. I saw a worker being dragged away while being caned harshly by the police. I found a good number of workers injured. I could see the senior executives peeping through the windows.</p>
<p>Later I came to know that the situation had been sparked off when one of our workers had snatched the loaded gun from the policeman and rushed inside the factory for refuge.</p>
<p>Obviously, the Police could never be tolerant to such provocation.They reacted violently. When I reached the gate, they had already taken the position to open fire.</p>
<p>I tried to step in. The police officer in-charge did not take my intervention kindly. He threatened that he would just withdraw his force if the management felt that they were capable of handling the situation. I pursued the dialogue. When the police slowed down their action, encouraged by my supportive intervention, the workers started pelting stones on them. The situation was too ticklish – I realized that I had caught a <em>Tartar</em>. Somehow the process started unfolding itself and slowly the situation calmed down. After a storm, there was silence. We then turned to the injured workers and arranged for medical assistance. The situation gradually normalized.</p>
<p>A little bit of demonstration of courage and patience to pause got me the credence, which I could not have earned by shying away from the situation. From then on, the union always treated me with ever more respect. I thanked the Japanese technique of <em>ma’ </em>that made me to gain time, have patience to understand the situation and to take action without haste, although there was a strong suggestive pressure from my welfare officer to run away and find some fox holes. I gained wisdom:</p>
<p>
<em>It is better to punctuate the furiou</em>
<em>s </em>
<em>situation with a Ma’ than t</em>
<em>o </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>In the onlooker’s eye lies the real image</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em>drink tea with a folk in haste </em>
</p>
<H2/>
<p>he mid-eighties brought a lot of learning</p>
<p>experiences to me. It was my second assignment in HMT. I was transferred from HMT Lamps to HMT Bearing, Hyderabad. (Late) SS Ahuja was then my general manager – a turnaround expert. Once he called me and asked for feedback. I gave him feedback about our training workshops, vigilance matters, morale of executives and other such issues.</p>
<p>“That’s all OK,” he said. “But I have called you specifically for some genuine feedback about me. I have completed three months here in this factory. I want to know what people feel about me, my style of leadership, my approach, and my performance?”</p>
<p>I highlighted a few genuine pieces of positive feedback. He was not satisfied. He insisted on negative feedback. He was keen to know, “How do I look to others – good or bad?”</p>
<p>With a rapport of hardly three months, I was not inclined to risk uttering something that he might not find palatable. I was conscious of a story I had recently read about such a gesture of courage:</p>
<p>It appears that Adolf Hitler once decided to gather some negative feedback about him. None of his subordinates dared; everybody praised him. When he insisted, one General gave some mild negative feedback. Hitler was delighted with his honesty and courage, and he suggested they discuss it in detail in the adjacent chamber. Both went inside, after ten minutes only one person came out of the chamber – Hitler.</p>
<p>I didn’t want to make the same mistake with my new boss. But my boss was relentless and I gave in - giving him a mouthful of negative feedback. He listened to me keenly and then thanked and asked me to see him again the next month.</p>
<p>When I went to him after a month, he asked me, “Did you find any improvement in my style, approach, or behaviour during the last month?” I made no hesitation, but told him frankly, “Yes, sir – of course!”</p>
<p>
<em>I was enlightened</em>
<em>: </em>
<em>To make headway, one mus</em>
<em>t </em>
<em>improve one’s head. And negativ</em>
<em>e </em>
<em>feedback is the best sourc</em>
<em>e </em>
<em>of improvemen</em>
<em>t </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>If you cannot feed hundred people, then just feed one </em>
</p>
<p>– Mother Teresa</p>
<p>
<strong>Generosity is giving more than you can; Pride is taking less than you need </strong>
</p>
<H2/>
<p><span><sub>“</sub></span>Ability is of little account without opportunity,” said Napoleon once.</p>
<p>But for those who belong to the reserved category in India, in some of the cases opportunity subordinates their ability.</p>
<p>I had heard many stories of misuse of concessions. And when Gaikward, a personnel officer, HMT Bearings, belonging to the reserved category reminded me just a day before his interview that he belonged to that privileged class, I could not take such reminder kindly. I was a bit annoyed, but maintained my calm.</p>
<p>“You know sir, I belong to the reserved category,” he had remarked.</p>
<p>“Yes,” I tried to avoid the conversation with the candidate who was expected to appear for the interview just the next day.</p>
<p>“Mr. Madan Gopal is also appearing for interview tomorrow for the same position,” he continued.</p>
<p>“Yes, I know.”</p>
<p>“He is junior to me,” he paused looking at me. I kept quiet. He went on.</p>
<p>“Not only is he junior to me but also he is from the general category. He does not belong to the reserved category”. My raised eye-brows, skin-folds on my forehead and a very harsh “Yes” couldn’t deter him. He continued.</p>
<p>“Obviously, the committee is bound to select me for promotion…” He was gradually trespassing the boundaries of official decorum.</p>
<p>“… could be,” I gave a political answer, knowing well that I had no much option than to select him.</p>
<p>“But, sir… Madan Gopal is a much better performer,” he twisted the topic. I just did not understand what he was tricking by adding the sauce of confusion to a savoury dish! I decided to keep mum and he continued.</p>
<p>“People will lose confidence in merit,” he paused, perhaps to choose appropriate words. “I have come to request you, sir – please promote Madan Gopal, he deserves it much more than I do.”</p>
<p>“Do you know what you mean?” I thought that he was pleading for Madan, taking his own promotion for granted.</p>
<p>“I know, sir, there is only one vacancy. I am also aware that if I am not selected, I will not be eligible for promotion for the next one year. If you want, I can give in writing. Believe me, I am not interested in my promotion, because I know someone else deserves it more than I do.”</p>
<p>Next day, during the interview, he took the same stand. Obviously, he lost the opportunity which was virtually in his lap.</p>
<p>For the first time, I understood what the great Shakespeare meant when he wrote, “Some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall.” What a great fall! I felt envious. I was totally sold out to this great monk, who had broken the myths and carved a niche.</p>
<p>I can never forget his gesture of great sacrifice for the cause of a healthy work environment, where management could reward based on performance.</p>
<p>
<em>We don’t quite forgive a giver! </em>
</p>
<H2/>
<p>uring the late-eighties, I had an occasion to</p>
<p>hear a towering personality in a national seminar on Productivity – Janab Abid Hussain, a bureaucrat, who later represented the country as Ambassador to the US. During the coffee break, the organizer introduced me to Abid Hussain only to learn from him that he already knew me. Obviously, the organizer was slightly embarrassed.</p>
<p>“He knows me since my father was working under him,” I hastened to clarify my childhood relationship with him. But Mr. Abid Hussain did not take my words kindly. “Moid, never use this word <em>under</em> again – Ghani Saheb (my father) was working with me. He was my colleague.” He thus showed his humility, dignity and nobility.</p>
<p>The first lesson of HRD against the <em>bureaucratic patriarchy</em> I learned from a bureaucrat and not from any HRD guru. A management monk who lived under the veil of bureaucracy bestowed wisdom upon me!</p>
<p>
<em>We must learn not to subordinat</em>
<em>e </em>
<em>our subordinates whil</em>
<em>e </em>
<em>working with the</em>
<em>m </em>
</p>
<p>ne proverb that doesn’t make sense to me</p>
<p>is, <em>A rolling stone gathers no moss!</em> Doesn’t it discourage mobility? Doesn’t it dissuade people attaining diverse experience? Doesn’t it nail down the very concept of cross-functionalism and generic approach, which stem from a spiral growth? What I know and believe is: mobility pays and enriches one’s knowledge. It is better to roll even with the disadvantage of not gathering moss, if the other option is to be ‘a frog in a well’. Mobility has always paid me in terms of riches of experiences and new lights of wisdom.</p>
<p>After a couple of decades of hectic innings with the unions, industrial relations, personnel, disciplinary and vigilance matters at the unit levels in four multi-unit multiproduct premier public sector undertakings of India, when for the first time I was given the corporate assignment during late ’87, my boss – general manager (personnel & administration) – imparted a new knowledge to me:</p>
<p>“All through your career you have learnt to face and tackle the problems directly. One way to look at it, is like steering by sitting in the driver’s seat. But now you are in the corporate office. Remember, there can’t be two persons in the driver’s seat. It is time for you to learn how to sit on the back seat, without trying to steer!” I shivered, not with fear but with the vibrations generated by his statement. Such a simple lesson is often not understood or neglected by the corporate bureaucrats who tend to steer, grabbing the driver’s seat for they know not the art of occupying the back seat when someone else is driving. I understood the wisdom of <em>macrocosm</em>, for the first time:</p>
<p>
<em>Managing is different from </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>interfering – push less; be aware. </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>Don’t dominate. Manifest </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>Vagueness is at times an indication of nearness to a perfect truth </em>
</p>
<p>– Charles Ivis</p>
<p>
<strong>Have little and gain; Have much and be confused </strong>
</p>
<p>t was November ’87. I had then recently taken charge at the corporate level. One of my assignments was to fine-tune the Personnel policies. I started one by one.</p>
<p>I found ambiguity in one of the very important Personnel policies, for it was too brief. I thought of streamlining it. I discussed with my immediate corporate boss, MK Jaura.</p>
<p>“Why do you want to modify it?” he asked.</p>
<p>It is too brief,” was my brief answer.</p>
<p>“So what!”</p>
<p>“It is ambiguously brief.” I touched the <em>ambiguity</em> to win the dialogue.</p>
<p>“Ambiguity is strength sometimes. Learn to acquire mastery over brevity. Create ambiguity thoughtfully – it pays,” he gave a tip. I simply smiled, taking it as boss’s last say, which is a very common phenomenon.</p>
<p>It was much later when I understood what my boss had in his mind. I was reading a book on Japanese Management. The concept of Juggling described there was nothing but an art to create a purposeful ambiguity through brevity. This technique of transaction without commitment, but sustaining the faith and confidence of the aggrieved person is considered fruitful. My urge to discover more about ambiguity aggravated.</p>
<p>Lately I discovered:</p>
<p>‘Probably the most famous source of ambiguous pronouncement was the oracle at Delphi in the ancient world. One of the oracle’s best-known prophecies came in the year 480 BC. The Persians under Xerxes had invaded the Greek mainland and had successfully conquered two-third of the country. Naturally, the Athenian city-fathers were concerned as to which course of action they should take against the oncoming Persians. Their suppliants got the prophecy from Delphi: The wooden wall will save you and your children.</p>
<p>One person suggested to erect a wooden barricade on the Acropolis – that’s what the ‘wooden wall’ meant.</p>
<p>But the city-fathers knew that the oracle was intentionally ambiguous to force them to go beyond the first right answer. They tried to think of all the contexts – both literal and metaphorical. After some thought, they came up with another idea. Could the wooden wall to which the</p>
<p>oracle was referring be the result of all of the Athenian wooden-hulled ship lined up next to one another? From a distance, the ships would indeed look like a wooden wall. The city-fathers decided, therefore, that the battle should be a naval one rather than a land one. The oracle’s ambiguity forced the Athenians to consult the deeper wisdom of their own intuition, and consider alternatives.’</p>
<p>I understood the magic behind ambiguity and brevity. I realized, how badly the policies can be messed up by providing clarification upon clarification. Sometimes the clarification overwrites the original text with riches of hidden oracles provided by the city-fathers of Athens. I actualized the depth of wisdom imparted by my boss almost two decades ago.</p>
<p>
<em>Ambiguity and brevity provide clarity by unfolding deeper wisdom and intuition </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Faith is an oasis in the desert of mistrust </strong>
</p>
<p>he year was 1988. ‘Corporate Promotions’</p>
<p>was one of the tasks assigned to me by HR Alva, my Director, Personnel, HMT, corporate office. I rendered my assistance in computerizing the proceedings, and I made all the necessary arrangements that the new promotion policy required.</p>
<p>Since I was also one of the candidates, I wanted to distance myself from the process. But the boss, Alva, felt differently. After each day of interviews, he handed over the proceedings to me.</p>
<p>At the end of the day on which I was interviewed, I was amazed – he once again gave the proceedings to me. I took them with my shaking hands. But the boss had given the papers to me with complete confidence, as if everything were routine and normal. His trust in me was noble. And I reciprocated that trust – I never glanced through those proceedings. I came to know of my selection only when the promotion orders were issued to all the selected senior executives. It was his gesture of trust that championed me, not his consideration of my promotion.</p>
<p>
<em>Trust begets trust’ is not merely a phrase – I realized </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Allow space for others to emerge </strong>
</p>
<p>he time was the beginning of ’89.</p>
<p>AK (Arvind Kumar) and PK (Pratik Kumar) created a stir in the organization. It was not the selection through XLRI campus of these 23 year old professional guys, but their posting in the Personnel Directorate at the corporate level, that raised the siren of threat and created anxiety among the senior personnel pundits of HMT.</p>
<p>Both, AK and PK were place with me. People peeped in, just to glance at these young men chosen to dictate the fate of 30,000 employees of the company around the country. However, they could hardly notice anything great except their shy gestures fluttering over innocence. They were convinced – the management had gone crazy. After all, there was no dirth of veterans who greyed their hair by dealing in Personnel matters.</p>
<p>A week later, HR Alva, my director (personnel) asked whether the campus recruits had joined. My reply that they had already joined a week ago, was not taken very kindly by him. He was sorry that I did not introduce them to him. I went back and returned with the youngsters. He welcomed them by getting up from his chair and regretted that he couldn’t see them earlier because of his busy schedule, leaving me wondering how nicely he had taken the entire blame on himself. After a 30-minute chat at the cost of his important schedules, he made the concluding remarks:</p>
<p>“You see, we are a 35 year old company. We are carrying on by virtue of our experience. We are not able to see the dust of obsolescence that must have gathered on most of us. You are young. You have come fresh from a professional institute with updated knowledge. Feel free to see me. Never hesitate in correcting whenever you observe that we have gone astray. I want to learn from you.”</p>
<p>I was observing our director (personnel). His words showed neither hypocrisy nor modesty – he was plainly speaking from his heart. A person who was know for his professional excellence, was requesting the youngsters to teach him and correct him for they knew the latest. I now understood the secret of his excellence. The thoughts of my</p>
<p>favourite management monk of the 5<span><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-">th<\/a><\/sup></span> Century BC – Lao Tsu – started appearing from nowhere. Wisdom dazzled:</p>
<p>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Under heaven nothing is more soft and yielding than water </strong>
</p>
<p>he 1990s were ready to blossom. “How to</p>
<p>meet the challenges of the nineties!” was everybody’s concern. No one seemed to be content with what was actually happening. Everyone was upset over what might happen tomorrow!</p>
<p>As an HRDian, I was not unaware of the challenges likely to spring up with the unfolding of the nineties. I started working on HRD Systems along with my colleagues. One of my colleagues and I developed an MBO based performance appraisal system, linking the evaluation of performance with the predetermined targets set jointly by the appraisee and the appraiser. We called it PIDS – Performance Improvement and (Personal) Development System. We claimed, it was more pro-active and holistic. In fact, both of us had conducted a joint study on this subject</p>
<p>as a research project during our stay at the International Resource Centre at UK. We were fully convinced that PIDS was perhaps the best solution to most of the mind-boggling issues of our company, HMT. We took care to integrate PIDS not only with the individual targets, personal development needs of each senior executive, but also with the career growth plans, succession plans, job rotation, counselling, golden handshake scheme and, above all, with the company’s objectives in terms of MOU signed with the Ministry of Industry. We were very confident of its success.</p>
<p>But when we made a presentation before the Board, the unexpected resistance came from our own Chairman, Dr M R Naidu. We were caught unaware, for we were not prepared for such an internal resistance. When we tried to put forth our viewpoint more forcefully in support of the system, he reacted sharply but very politely.</p>
<p>“Why at all should there be rules or systems for achieving the desired objectives?” he raised the fundamental objection.</p>
<p>“System help attain the required objectives and they are capable of creating the desired climate,” was my political answer. <em>Political</em>, in the sense, I tried to press my viewpoint</p>
<p>shrewdly without giving a direct answer to his simple query. His smile spoke volumes.</p>
<p>“How’s that the best companies of the world don’t have such performance appraisal systems? GM, GE, EDS, IBM, McKinsey, Apple… you name any. They don’t have any such system, still they perform well.”</p>
<p>“But, sir, can we compare the work culture or management culture of our company with those which excelled as the global best? PIDS is the best system ever produced by our in-house HRD team.” I took that extra liberty, knowing well the open nature of my CEO. Sometimes, he used to provoke purposefully to get the best. Once again, a charming grin blossomed.</p>
<p>“I am not contesting or undervaluing the PIDS as a system – I am merely questioning its utility in practice. Rules regulate and constrict the flow. What I want is something synonymous to the flow of water. Water freely and fearlessly goes deep beneath the surface of things – it flows and help flow. What I am looking for is something that would stimulate flow as smooth as the flow of water. Nevertheless,</p>
<p>you may try PIDS as a dry-run, but keep my requirement in mind.”</p>
<p>We were happy. We could sell our system successfully. What we couldn’t understand then was the water logic stemming from my CEO’s <em>native wit. </em></p>
<p>Later, when I was reading Lao Tsu’s ‘Toa Te Ching’ I could understand what my Chairman meant by ‘water-like flowing process’. So long we maintain fluidity in our thoughts and approach, creativity goes on designing and forming various shapes. Fragility, flexibility, agility and softness maintain the flow — rules and procedures provide rigidity, inflexibility and hardness, which hamper and hinder more than help maintain the process.</p>
<p>It takes time to grow in wisdom:</p>
<p>“Water gives life to the ten thousand things and does not strive,</p>
<p>It flows in places men reject and so is like the Tao !</p>
<p>The world is ruled by letting things take their course,</p>
<p>It cannot be ruled by interference.</p>
<p>The perfect square has no corners; The greatest form has no shape! Thus, A great tailor cuts little!” (Tao Te Ching)</p>
<p>
<strong>Be daring, be first, be different, be just </strong>
</p>
<p>he year ’89 was the year of Nehru Centenary. The entire nation was contributing in one way or the other. I couldn’t remain a silent spectator. I wrote a poem – Shraddhanjali – highlighting the Nehruvian philosophy by bringing ‘Work is Worship’ into sharp focus. It jelled well with the management concepts. It was published in the company’s house journal. I sent it to Mr. Rajiv Gandhi, the then Prime Minister of India with my personal letter to him. Shraddhanjali earned much appreciation from him, “I was deeply touched by the sentiments that you have expressed,” he wrote.</p>
<p>Like a spring, the beginning of all things is small. My director (personnel) liked the theme. He just wrote one line: Let us translate it into action. These words came out to be so powerful that it vibrated the entire hidden talents of the company. A TV film was produced exclusively by the in</p>
<p>house talents – right from script writing, lyrics, singing to acting. A top management person came out with such a whole hearted support that his resources and goodwill, built during his association with the Censor Board, resulted in the cine celebrity, Waheeda Rehman volunteering to be the anchor person.</p>
<p>This filmmaking was a unique. A 30-minute film gave us so much to learn – a basketful of flowers and brickbats. When everyone was ready with make-up and everything was set for an outdoor shooting, the film director fell out. Taking advantage of the situation, he tried to dictate terms to us, which were not acceptable. He gave the call to ‘pack up’. We were caught unaware by the <em>film-walas. </em>Tears swelled in my eyes. The dream was about to shatter. I heard the roaring command of the same well-wisher.</p>
<p>“Moid, you shall direct the film,” he gave me the firm decision. Despite my evident resistance, he went on telling: “I am sure, you can do it.” I knew, he would go on repeating it until his tongue bled. He was not the kind of person who would give up. I had no option. I yielded.</p>
<p>It was his confidence, not my competence that made me direct the film. The venture was most successful!</p>
<p>When the entire nation was witnessing on the national network, the unique HRD venture by the amateur artistes of the company – Timekeepers to the nation – I was sinking in the nostalgia, going back to the day one of the mission. Wisdom started manifesting:</p>
<p>
<em>The phrase ‘You Can!’ is powerful</em>
<em>. </em>
<em>Not the words, but the level of dept</em>
<em>h </em>
<em>of heart they come from, create the impac</em>
<em>t </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>If there is a way to do better. . . . Find out </strong>
</p>
<p>ne of my senior colleagues always narrates</p>
<p>an incident, whenever he takes a session on Productivity Improvement Program (PIP). Once it appears, a team of Japanese consultants visited our company. They asked my colleague, <em>Was there any problem?</em> As things were going smooth and our company was doing well, he obviously replied that he had no problem. “Then, why don’t you create a problem?” was the simple suggestion from the Japanese.</p>
<p>Later, he understood what the Japanese meant by creating a problem. A re-look over the present way of working or target setting would give new insight to <em>What more can be done. </em>This insight would enable one to set a new benchmark. Once it is done, the objective of creating a problem is achieved! The logic and the need for creating a problem appeared so simple.</p>
<p>To a Kaizen-mind, excellence has no lid. One can always excel the excellence. Turning a Nelson’s eye to the problems is a well nigh natural behaviour. “The problem is not that</p>
<p>we don’t have solutions – the problem is that we don’t want to see a problem!” was the genuine worry of Peter Drucker. If this is the state of affairs, the strategic move to create a new problem is much above the common understanding.</p>
<p>Creation of a problem is the key to success, I realized. PQCD – Productivity, Quality, Cost (effectiveness) and Delivery – can be taken care of by just creating a problem. The kernel, which I could get out of my colleague’s experience, was something, which would sound wrong English. Not the grammar, but the underlying meaning that is important to allure wisdom:</p>
<p>
<em>Better the best by creating a problem </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>A single lie destroys a whole reputation of integrity </em>
</p>
<p>– Baltasar Gracion</p>
<p>
<strong>A race horse that can run a mile a few seconds faster is worth twice as much </strong>
</p>
<p>t was May ’91. I was posted as MDI Chief in HMT Bangalore. It was my first exposure to Training, which later became my passion.</p>
<p>I was conducting the review discussion with Arvind Kumar Mishra, whom I used to fondly call ‘AK’. I found his performance outstanding. As an appraiser, I appraised him of the excellent contributions made by him during the year 1990-91.</p>
<p>I had sponsored him to represent the company in a live SATCOM tele-conference, conducted as a joint venture with Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO), linking the far flung units of six premier companies through an electronicbridge with two-way audio and one-way video channels. AK, in his mid twenties, had stolen the show from the best senior faculties of the premier companies as well as academic institutes. I expressed my appreciation for such excellent contribution during the review discussion. But the young guy was not quite satisfied. He insisted that I record some of</p>
<p>his negative aspects and also indicate the areas where I expected improvements from him.</p>
<p>“You ought to get better organized and learn ‘prioritizing the tasks – First thing first,” I made a casual verbal observation since he was too insistent.</p>
<p>I gave the appraisal format to him for his signature after the review discussions. He smiled and took the format. But he didn’t simply append his signature. He first recorded my observations and then mentioned that he would try his best to improve. I never wanted to put such negative remarks on record. But he did it smilingly.</p>
<p>Such a gesture of intellectual integrity from AK was of no surprise to me.The very first meeting with AK was unique.</p>
<p>“I have cheated you, let me be frank and honest to you,” was his first sentence after the formal rituals of helloing. He explained that though he was not supposed to accept any other offer after his campus selection by us, he had already taken up a monetarily better assignment in a private company. But he was willing to join Corporate HMT, if I assured him of some creative assignment.</p>
<p>I smiled and assured him. I too decided to be frank and honest. I assured him that even the best assignment with us would not be creative, though it would espouse 10% to 20% creativity. It was for him to procreate creativity in the routine assignments. To my surprise, he agreed to join us. He liked the way I put the realistic situation before him.</p>
<p>He introduced a lot of ‘creativity’ even in the routine matters like <em>industrial relations.</em> He championed the unions by his frank and honest transactions.</p>
<p>I recollected another shock of his honesty. He was being interviewed for promotion. The selection committee was fully convinced to promote him as a high flier. I casually asked, whether he would stay in the company if he was considered for promotion. He smiled and refused to give any such assurance. But he promised that he would stay with us for six months or so, of course without any <em>quid pro quo</em>. We decided to promote him.</p>
<p>I came out of the nostalgic reminiscence. AK was sitting in front of me. He reminded me that he had completed the committed period after his promotion and that he would soon be leaving us. He also mentioned that his prospective employer would request me to send the copies of his performance appraisals. He had recorded the negative aspects thoughtfully and consciously so that his new employer must also know the negative side of AK. I just didn’t know how to react. Truth awakened my belief:</p>
<p>
<em>People with professional honesty, </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>intellectual dignity and intellectual </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>integrity are not extinct species </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>How mean am I when life gives me gold and I give you silver; and I deem myself generous ! </strong>
</p>
<p>he MOMENT OF TRUTH manifests when a</p>
<p>customer comes in contact with some aspect of the organization, and makes a judgment about the quality of service that the organization provides. It is that simple gesture which leaves a momentous impression on the thoughts and in the mind of a customer, which helps the company gain the competitive edge. Why are such moments of truth only associated to marketing or sales? I don’t understand! They can happen anywhere.</p>
<p>In 1991, during the initial stages of the development of the Management Development Institute (MDI) of HMT I had once decided to accommodate a few Management Trainees (who were assigned to us for an induction training) in the surplus portion of our Centre of HRD at the first floor as a good gesture. I knew this needed a bit of sacrifice by my people because any hostel like shelter could be a real nuisance value to the other part of the office. I therefore discussed the issue with my people and could manage a</p>
<p>reluctant acquiescence. I then organized everything on hiring basis and made a commitment to the young guys. They were glad. But, I couldn’t keep up my words. My people were not very happy and the informal sources of an informal organization worked against the decision so strongly that I was forced to reverse the decision.</p>
<p>A month later I visited Rashid Bhai, my elder brother at Hyderabad. I found three unfamiliar guests at the dining table. Later I enquired from my <em>Bhabi</em> (sister-in-law). “They are new engineers. They have come from Delhi for some training here,” she said.</p>
<p>“But why should they be your guests?” I asked.</p>
<p>“This was precisely my objection,” she said. “But your brother says that the guesthouse of the company is under renovation and due to some communication gap these guys landed here. He says, the commitment of his company is his commitment”</p>
<p>“But it costs…!” I dragged to get more.</p>
<p>“<em>The company has given us so much – what if we incur something for the company</em> is the argument of your brother,” was the answer from my <em>Bhabi</em>.</p>
<p>My jaws fell. My conscience pricked my soul – why didn’t this simple thing strike me in my own analogous situation! After all, my company had provided me a much</p>
<p>bigger accommodation than did my brother’s. To an HRD person, the management trainees, who were refused accommodation after a commitment, were internal customers. A moment of truth of that kind could have carved an indelible niche. I got perturbed with a regret of no mean measure. But gradually the sagacity started unfolding its enchantment:</p>
<p>
<em>No problem is above the wil</em>
<em>l </em>
<em>and commitment. Winner is he wh</em>
<em>o </em>
<em>commits and carries it out successfull</em>
<em>y </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Don’t enslave your talent </strong>
</p>
<p>he issue was, <em>how to resolve the problem of </em></p>
<p><em>jumping the contractual obligations by the management trainees during the bond period?</em> Somehow I was not convinced with management’s policy of retaining the talents per force of legal bond. Market was in favour of talents, who would never like to get bound with legal bondages. I, therefore, initiated a note requesting my Chairman and Managing Director to drop the policy of execution of bond in the case of Campus Recruitments. But the file was returned by director finance, endorsing his views: <em>Keep the original titles of the property of the surety in the custody of the management. </em></p>
<p>“Why not hold someone to ransom, if the solution to the problem was to be discovered only through whims?” I thought in disgust. A similar suggestion had come from a stone-age manager the other day, who had suggested to increase the period and value of bond to resolve the issue. “How does it differ from the bonded labour concept?” I had</p>
<p>thought then. My nostalgia started whacking my memory harshly.</p>
<p>The turnover of the IT experts was alarmingly high. The lucrative compensation package in the market and the poaching of IT professionals by the competitors were other dimensions, which had worsened the problem. Why single out IT or computer engineers? For the matter, retention of high fliers and professional talents was an open challenge to HRD. The good yield from the campus recruitment at the premier institutes of the country until last year, had come down drastically. While interviewing the candidates, quite often we were interrupted only to know the coordinator that the candidate was already sold out. To address this problem, the management decided to go for angling in some other institutes in the vicinity. However, it was destined to make the execution of bond compulsory. The recruitment committee faced the problem during the Pre-PreparatoryTalk (PPT) itself. The youngsters were not happy with the condition of the Bond. However, we could persuade them. The interview commenced.</p>
<p>Our experience with the first three candidates was not very encouraging. A glance at the CV of the fourth candidate showed a ray of hope. She had an excellent academic record. Her confident entry, sparkling face and a winner’s smirk announced, <em>Yes, I am the candidate you were looking for</em>! To</p>
<p>be frank, the committee got slightly excited with the discovery of the prospective candidate. But before we could ask any question she wanted to say something. We decided to hear her first.</p>
<p>“I am an orphan,” she started. “Is she trying to play the game, <em>Poor Me</em>,” I thought suspiciously. But she continued. “I lost my father, when I was in the first year of my engineering. My mother toiled hard to make both ends meet. But she vowed to see that I came out as an Engineer. She did succeed. But her sweat will dry up only when I get a job. Believe me sir, I badly need a job.” Her blinking wet eyes won all our sympathy. She was trying to gain our favour, I was sure. Sensing the human behaviour is supposed to be my forte.</p>
<p>“But I have not come to seek charity. I want to be very sure, would you insist on a bond if I am selected?” Her voice was well modulated and every word she spoke carried weight. My forte melted down.</p>
<p>“Let us interview you first, we will discuss this issue later,” I suggested.</p>
<p>“I am sorry sir. I wouldn’t like to waste your and my time,” she said. She was absolutely clear what she was speaking. We whispered among ourselves. We had no option. The policy of the company was not in favour of the situation.</p>
<p>We cut a sorry figure. She didn’t give any impression of her regrets. She thanked, bowed and left, carrying with her the winner’s smile.</p>
<p>This incident reminded me of a story of “The Lost Sheep” that I had read during my school days.</p>
<p>A sheep found a hole in the fence and crept through it. He wandered far and could not find his way back. And then he realised that he was being followed by a wolf. He ran and ran, but the wolf kept chasing him, until the shepherd rescued him and carried him lovingly back to the fold.</p>
<p>And inspite of everyone’s advice the shepherd refused to nail up the hole in the fence!</p>
<p>If you love something set it free, and it will come back to you if it deserves your love. By putting fences we are likely to lose our relationship. The silken bonds of love are more enduring than walls and fences.</p>
<p>The wisdom that I got during my school days was lost in modern management’s policies and systems.</p>
<p>I came out of my reminiscence. The file carrying the decision to padlock the bondage norms was lying before me. “Are we really ignorant of the Present, or trying to be willfully blind?” I asked myself. More important was the changing environment – this happened while we were all agog and</p>
<p>afoot to bring about a stirring change in the organization to keep pace with the fast moving time. The file started blurring and morphed into the faded features of the girl who had us realize that potential candidates are out of reach of headhunters, who follow the conventional tricks. Her unspoken words vibrated my eardrums. Wisdom whacked:</p>
<p>
<em>Legal bonds cannot retain your talents</em>
<em>. </em>
<em>Execute ‘Love-bonds’</em>
<em>! </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Like a shadow be there to support your people. </strong>
</p>
<p>rust and faith can get you many things in</p>
<p>life, provided they are pure. Trust begets trust and mistrust breeds mistrust! Most of the organizations and people grow in mistrust and therefore you overwhelmingly witness mistrust everywhere. When your foundation is based on mistrust it is not quite easy to create the culture of trust. ‘Trust’ is <em>sine qua non</em> to ‘Empowerment’.</p>
<p>Let me share one unique episode that happened to me during my HMT days. The year was 1989. When after doing my innings as HR Chief in the manufacturing units I was posted to Bangalore to manage the corporate HR, my boss – MK Jaura, general manager (HR) — advised me that I should be very careful about the corporate politics. He said that politics was played in such a subtle manner that the victim comes to know only when the carpet is already pulled</p>
<p>off his feet. But he never wanted me to be afraid of the corporate politics and wished I should feel free to contribute in the manner I thought fit. To encourage me he told, “If you do something good and people appreciate, say it is my own initiative. And when you do something good from your understanding but it boomerangs, say I did because my boss asked me to do.” I thought he was saying so just to give me comfort and confidence. Honestly, I didn’t take his words seriously.</p>
<p>After a few days I confronted with a situation where I had no option than to put up a very strongly-worded note to the director (finance) making the legal consequences clear, which could even result in fine and arrest of the defaulting authority. The issue was non-payment of salaries to the employees of HMT Lamps, Hyderabad. Director (finance) refused to pay money for salaries because Lamps unit was making huge losses. I had no direct access to director finance, so all my struggle for getting the cheque for Lamps unit was through my boss, MK Jaura. When I routed this strong note through him, very hesitantly he endorsed his initials cautioning me that I was inviting trouble for ‘both of us’. But he didn’t stop me demonstrating courage on paper.</p>
<p>Next day, to my great surprise, the issue was resolved and my boss called me and gave the cheque asking me to send it to the unit HR Chief so that he could arrange payment of salary without inviting more trouble from the union. I was very happy and boasted about this incidence with some of my colleagues. Next day morning I received the call from the secretary of the director (finance) who invited me for a cup of coffee. When I was taking the first sip of my coffee, she asked, “Did your boss tell you what had happened the other day?” “No,” I told blankly. She was really surprised that my boss didn’t share with me such a big episode. On my insistence she revealed to me that the director (finance) didn’t take my note kindly and became furious over my arrogance for putting the note in such a blunt language. Then he called for my boss and told him that he wanted to see me. But my boss told him that the note was dictated by him and it was given to me for my signature so there was no fault of mine. He took all the blame and shielded me from his wrath. Later, it appears, he guardedly cautioned the director (finance) about the legal consequences. Since the steam was let off, the director finance finally instructed his department to issue the cheque, which my boss had brought and given to me</p>
<p>without mentioning anything about the trouble he had gone through. MK Jaura, my boss, not only took all the blame but also provided full shelter when director finance wanted to see me to outrage his anger.</p>
<p>This incident created a unique place in my heart for MK Jaura. He walked the talk. He demonstrated his words in action and won my heart by giving me a quality-support</p>
<p>– a kind of support hardly experienced in today’s business organizations. “When the sea is calm all sailors show their craftsmanship,” says Shakespeare. The real test of rowingskills is in the turbulent waters. Likewise, anybody can be boastful of giving support to his people in normal times. The test of leadership lies in demonstrating courage for supporting the subordinate in a situation, where everything has turned against him. What MK Jaura did to me was a Moment of Magic. Though two decades have passed I still remember him and revere him. He never shared this episode with me, nor did I tell him that I knew about it. He obliged me but never cast an obligation upon me!</p>
<p>Demonstrate your trust and support at the time it is needed most can soothe the heart and nourish the soul. This is the secret of empowerment; this is the secret of leadership. The Hindi phrase, “Mein Hoon Na…” (I’m there… to support you) is the <em>Gayatri Mantra</em> of <em>Empowerment</em> that plays miracles at workplace!</p>
<p>
<strong>First shape the idea softly . . . </strong>
</p>
<p><em>reativity</em> and <em>Innovation</em> are two phases of the</p>
<p>same coin. Those who have a creative mind can alone innovate. <em>Creativity</em> is input; <em>Innovation</em> is output. Likewise, learning is breathing in; imparting knowledge is breathing out. Those who impart training must also be open to learning. Those who breathe in alone can breathe out. Such a simple HRD equation people understand not!</p>
<p>Again, the ability to learn depends on one’s <em>learning horizon.</em> For some, <em>learning horizon</em> is spaceless and learning is endless – they go on expanding their learning horizon and become great learners. Their appetite for learning never ends.</p>
<p>This saga is of one such worshipper of knowledge.</p>
<p>P C Neogy, my CEO always remained an inquisitive learner. He often used to say, “Recharge yourself from the books and learn from everyone and from every incident. Begin your job, afresh everyday.” He frequently used to quote Swami Vivekananda, <em>Every soul is potentially divine! </em></p>
<p>P C Neogy untiringly persuaded his people to use the right side of their brain. “The brain is brilliantly uncreative in the sense that it will use the same pattern again and again under all circumstances,” Once he explained to me, borrowing the words from Edward de Bono. Creativity comes only through meditation,’ was his unshaken faith and Management by Meditation’ was his steadfast religion. He always gave precedence to the imaginative phase over the practical phase.</p>
<p>It took me years to follow the flight of his thoughts. What he perhaps meant was, First ‘shape’ the idea softly, then bake to harden it with practice. Obviously, one need to go through two phases – imaginative phase and practical phase. I caught the catchphrase: Think something different to get something done original.</p>
<p>“Why can’t you make the tractor-bonnets out of wood?” he suggested to an R&D guy, only to see people around laughing in their sleeves.</p>
<p>“I want slim watches; take a hacksaw and slice them!” He suggested to a watch designer during his visit top one of our watch factories located at a far-flung place. The echoes of the soundless smiles of those who were around him, reached me at the corporate office vibrating my eardrums. I bled on their ignorance for they knew not the kind of thinking, the management monk was trying to instill in their minds, which were filled with cold and stale stuff.</p>
<p>And a day came, he gave a smacking whack on the right side of my head. I had gone to him to get his OK for campus recruitment to cover the shortage of HRD professionals caused by an unprecedented exodus owing to market demand. “Create HRD managers out of mud,” was his simple and plain solution. I looked at his pointed finger to gain insight. It was a beautiful painting of a potter who was training his daughter how to make potter out of clay. The inscription below captured my eyes – A Potter and the Clay.</p>
<p>I understood what he meant. Like the potter, who was creating beautiful vessels out of the mud, he wanted me discover talents, train them and use them instead of going for outside recruitment. He wanted me to use my creative brain, instead of just following the routine pattern.</p>
<p>Wrapped into jack Welch’s words, Wisdom dawned on me:</p>
<p>
<em>Don’t look elsewher</em>
<em>e </em>
<em>to see what everyone thinks</em>
<em>. </em>
<em>Think for yourself</em>
<em>! </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Give me silence and I will outdare the night </strong>
</p>
<p>y and large, I find the youngsters recruited</p>
<p>through campus selection from professional institutes turning out fairly good. They are virtuous in concepts and their <em>fundas</em> are clear. They are worthy as racing horse – they can’t pull a Tonga. But in reality, an organization looks for both types of horses. When it comes to the brass tacks, these young guys throw up their hands. They rather avoid indulging in the routine tasks, whether it is IR, Legal or Personnel matters. I have seen a number of such brilliant guys who, while climbing hierarchy, just do not know how to cope with the day-to-day problems in office and manage their people. At such an hour of test, they either quit searching a foxhole, or get subordinated to their own subordinates. It happens nauseatingly often.</p>
<p>I therefore decided to work on Sharad Verma, a youngster who joined us from XLRI Jamshedpur – a sharp and intelligent guy. I appreciated his contribution in creative</p>
<p>areas and gave him a free hand. I tracked him as a faculty in the senior management programmes, against the company’s traditions at the cost of raised eyebrows of senior colleagues as well as of other participants. He performed well. I was fully convinced and satisfied with his talents. He was highly creative. He innovated training patterns and HRD systems. But he didn’t show any interest in the so-called routine-tasks, which had greater volume in HMT, a public sector company. For this reason I went on coaxing and demanding to do some dirty work (file management) as well.</p>
<p>Once, when I found that an important file of campus recruitment did not contain even the most important sanctions and basic selection documents, I really lost my patience. I knew a few people who faced vigilance inquiries and lost their jobs on such important matters. And if the basic documents do not find a place in the relevant file, the fate of such enquiries could be of anybody’s guess. I confess</p>
<p>– I was savagely harsh and brutally hoarse. Later I regretted the Baba-Yaga treatment that I meted out towards him. I was rather too aggressive, expecting such maturity from a youngster in dealing the file management, I realized. I felt very bad – what I did was not right.</p>
<p>I had totally forgotten the incident until I saw a poster on the backdrop of the seat of this young monk. It was interesting and revealing:</p>
<p>
<strong>Desiderata </strong>
</p>
<p>Do placidly amid the noise and the haste and remember what peace there may be in silence. As far as possible, without surrender, be on good terms with all persons. Avoid ‘loud’ and ‘aggressive’ persons; they are vexations to the spirit… I laughed at myself. The aphorism was meant for me.</p>
<p>This creative brain knew that I was working on some sort of Management Parables. He thought of assaying me to one, to grant me wisdom. I got the kernel of the ZEN study of truth tutoring, how to hear the unheard.</p>
<p>
<em>Silence speaks louder than spoken words </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>The great singer sings our silence </strong>
</p>
<p>he 1992 descended leaving our company in</p>
<p>a not too healthy situation. Reasons were many. But one of the undisputed reasons was the separation of one of the directors whose mother wit was his management wisdom; highly professionally qualified he was, though. He used to make commitments, not promises. His quick reflexes in decision-making hardly had a match. He was not afraid of losing at times. He used to speak politely and briefly allowing the natural outpouring of others. He knew how to vibrate and motivate people with his least intervention. There was no occasion when he must have tried to suddenly intervene powerfully or harshly, for he trusted and had full confidence in his people. Even in chaotic situations he knew how to keep his cool. He would follow his inner wisdom – mother with is the purest form wisdom. He was HR Alva – a genius!</p>
<p>But in an organization everyone earns his adversaries. So it happened to him too. He was no exception to this natural phenomenon. Once after his exit, one such adversary</p>
<p>tried to discount his worth by comparing him with another professional giant who was a voracious reader and was known for making references from management books.</p>
<p>“See, how well he quotes from the management books!” He admired the latter, indirectly suggesting that HR Alva, the outgoing director was not so learned.</p>
<p>“Yes, I agree with you,” I nodded my head. “One quotes</p>
<p>– the other is to be quoted,” was my simple but spontaneous reply. What I just said was not much clear to me. Later when I thought in a meditating mood, the wisdom of Tao sparked:</p>
<p>Be still and calm!</p>
<p>It is still water that makes its</p>
<p>surface a mirror and shows others their images.</p>
<p>
<em>Don’t be content by simply </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>quoting others. Rise to the </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>extent to be quoted by others </em>
<em>Honesty pays in long run – not sometimes, always </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Mistrust leads to paranoia, which induces suicidal tendencies </strong>
</p>
<p><em>rust</em> and <em>faith</em> are not built through words,</p>
<p>they are built through actions – it takes time to ‘grow’ with trust. You cannot grow apples by sowing the seeds of a jackfruit. You cannot expect to build trust by mistrusting others. Let me quote a true incident. I was working in HMT – a premier public sector organisation in India. Whenever I walked through the corridor to meet the Chief of Administration, I would see a ‘steel tumbler’ chained to the water cooler. I pleaded many times with my colleague that this indicates lack of trust, which is not good for the spiritual health of the organization. He always laughed at my views saying that he had already lost six tumblers and he was in no mood to lose a seventh. My argument was that let us lose another one dozen tumblers yet not lose our heart in building up trust. This, however, was not at all acceptable to him. I confess, I failed in convincing him and the tumbler remained chained to the water-cooling machine.</p>
<p>I was so disturbed with the sight of that ‘chained steel tumbler’ that sometimes it used to haunt me in my dreams. With all my trust in ‘Trust’ and all my faith in ‘Faith’ I could not manage to ‘unleash’ the steel tumbler.</p>
<p>During those days, I had visited the complex of Verifone, a multi-national organization at Bangalore. My colleague manager took me to her staff canteen. As we returned, I found a big glass jar on the table near the exit. “Honesty Jar” was boldly inscribed on it. Obviously, I was keen to know from the Verifone manager all about that ‘Honesty Jar’. She explained that they did not have a system of canteen coupons. Prices were displayed and employees were supposed to put the money in the Honesty Jar as per what they have consumed. “You must be in trouble at the end of the day!” I said with a mischievous smile. “You are right,” she said agreeing with me but in the same breath she added, “But not the kind of <em>trouble</em> you are thinking of in your mind.” Then she explained that her trouble was that every day she found an excess amount and she just did not know what to do with that extra money. She then explained that since the company had demonstrated its ability in building trust, the employees were reciprocating with more sincerity and honesty. Each employee thought that if even only one employee demonstrated dishonesty, the amount in</p>
<p>the Honesty Jar would fall short. So to overcome this, some of the employees put extra money in the jar so that the endresult would reflect ‘honouring the trust’.</p>
<p>The above experiment gave the opposite result than that in the famous ‘Milk Pot’ anecdote: A King, in order to check the trustworthiness of his people, asked every citizen to bring a mug full of milk to be poured into a huge pot. Each citizen thought to himself, “Surely others are going to bring pure milk. So why should I not pour water into the pot? It will hardly make any difference and the King will never know”. When everyone had poured the contents of their mug into the hug pot, the King came to see the milk in the big collection pot. To his surprise he found no milk, only water! When you create an environment of mistrust, all controls fail and what you get is only mistrust.</p>
<p>Build trust. It takes time to nurture trust. “I would rather have few thefts once in a while than condemn everyone to a system based on mistrust,” says an entrepreneur of Brazil who turned around his company SEMCO by following a simple principle – ‘Zero Tolerance to Mistrust’. His name is Ricardo Semler.</p>
<p>Once, Ricardo received an anonymous letter against two of his executives who had placed orders for prodders worth</p>
<p>more than $ 500,000 with the supplier. “But we had embarked on a new era of trust at SEMCO and it seemed consistent with that spirit to discount accusations that were not accompanied by solid evidence or even the accuser’s name,” writes Ricardo. Instead of investigating the actions of the executives, Ricardo decided to investigate the anonymous complainant with a clear mind. “If the allegations were false then we certainly did not want such a person working for us. If they were true, we should take the appropriate action, but we also wanted to know why such an underhand method of exposure was necessary.” Ricardo never wanted to encourage anonymous letters; these reflect a sign of lack of trust and lack of courage on the part of the sender. More surprisingly, he did not take action against the defaulting executives but took action against those who were party to the authorship of that anonymous letter. “So the two executives were exonerated and the accusers were dismissed. Only then did everyone come to know about the case,” claims Ricardo. With this action, he made it loud and clear that when he said ‘Zero tolerance for mistrust’, he meant it. One may ridicule his action but his surgery created a miracle and helped build a ‘culture of openness’ where people were encouraged to come forward and share openly their views - good or bad - about the organization but not through anonymity which is a sign of cowardice.</p>
<p>It takes time to build the culture of Trust. Trust is not</p>
<p>built with words. Trust is built by <em>see-able</em> actions. When you chain the tumblers to the water-cooler, you vulgarly demonstrate your ‘mistrust’. On the other hand, the ‘Honesty Jar’ of Verifone helped cultivate the culture of trust. Trust begets trust; mistrust leads to mistrust.</p>
<p>
<em>Like a fruit juicer, Life pours out what you feed into it. You cannot blame the juicer if you get sour fruit juice. But we always blame Life for our mistakes </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Teaching without words and work without doing are understood by very few </strong>
</p>
<p>ow we come to a story from 1993. My CEO</p>
<p>was taking a flight to Delhi and had sent a book from the airport for me, because he thought it would make useful reading for an HRD person. It was Peter F. Drucker’s Managing for the Future.</p>
<p>It was neither the fame of the author nor the text of the book that moved me. It was the high-touch gesture of the CEO who sent a book from the airport for an HRD person. That gesture deeply touched my soul.</p>
<p>At home later, I stood before a mirror – and I found in my image a person covered the dust of obsolescence. I rolled up my sleeves and decided to get back to the basics of what business management is all about. Wisdom dawned on me. During the nineties of nanoseconds, where speed and complexities make business management so different that we need to thrive on chaos just to keep the show on, we must get back those basics. It’s a matter of survival. Individual</p>
<p>reading is no more sufficient – each bit of knowledge must float across the organization.</p>
<p>The beginning of 21<span><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-">st<\/a><\/sup></span> century was more challenging. The second decade of the new century is not the climax. Tougher days are ahead.</p>
<p>
<em>Learning Organization is the only remedy – good leaders sow the seeds of change </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>Those having torches will pass them on to others </em>
</p>
<p>– Plato</p>
<p>
<strong>It takes two of us to discover truth; one to utter it and one to understand it </strong>
</p>
<p>ndustrial Relations have become synonymous</p>
<p>with Collective Bargaining. The word ‘bargaining’ somehow stinks. It connotes haggling. To my mind, haggling can never be accepted as a management technique. As an HRD person, I have been always critical of the haggling-soaked Industrial Relations. The unions cannot be reasonable as they only resort to bargaining, was my firm belief.</p>
<p>But my myth was broken. Recently, uncommonly concerned with the affairs of a multi-unit company, the unions decided to hold a joint meeting with the management. The initiative was taken by the unions to invite the management. I thought it was a bogy – a new strategy to sharpen their bargaining tools, by exploiting the low profile of the management. But it was only my prejudiced mind that was making me apprehensive.</p>
<p>The meeting began. Restructuring, TQM, TCS, KAIZEN, ISO 9000, Disinvestment Plans, Joint Ventures, Economy measures and a host of such work-related issues</p>
<p>were on their agenda. A few unions from the units tried to press their demands on incentive, welfare issues etc., but the Coordinator of the unions firmly dissuaded them not to discuss any issue which was not related to production, or productivity, quality, cost control, or delivery schedules. Management also responded very positively to most of their suggestions. The discussions were absolutely adult-to-adult, open and transparent. Unbelievably this happened in a public sector company, HMT, when it faced the bad time. And the union coordinator, who had shown uncommon wisdom, was PR Chandrasekhar.</p>
<p>What Douglas McGregor – the author of Human Side In Industry – perceived through ‘Y’, more than four decades ago, was witnessed by us. The seemingly two different goals of management and unions, when integrated, a common objective emerged – PQCD (Productivity, Quality, Cost, Delivery).</p>
<p>Wisdom gushed out cracking the 100-year old prejudices caused by the Webbs’ Collective Bargaining.</p>
<p>
<em>While boat sinks, concern floats</em>
<em>. </em>
<em>Company’s interest is no</em>
<em>t </em>
<em>the management’s monopol</em>
<em>y </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>Knowledge is love and light and vision </em>
</p>
<p>– Helen Keller</p>
<p>
<strong>The only limits are, as always, those of wisdom </strong>
</p>
<p>met this technocrat almost after a decade</p>
<p>during the mid-eighties. He was the chairman of the company where I had earlier worked. He had served on various assignments, including bureaucracy, for the last ten years. I knew that he was also the CEO of one of the Public Sector undertakings, which had a collaboration with a Japanese company.</p>
<p>A mentor that he was to me, I looked forward to learning from him the secret of success. I asked him to show me the path of success.</p>
<p>“Future belongs to those who can change themselves,” was the simple reply. I took this as his casual remark.</p>
<p>Later, I had an opportunity to hear his valedictory address in an international management seminar. He concluded his talk with his whispering punch: “If you don’t change, the change will force itself on you…”. This time I couldn’t take his words that casually. The whisper was forceful and penetrating deep into my mind.</p>
<p>Time elapsed and so did my memory.</p>
<p>During a session in the International Resource Centre at UK, while discussing the subject, Managing Change, a faculty asked the participants to write down on a piece of paper whom they thought was the change maker in India. He then asked us to readout the names. It was amazing – all the 22 participants from India wrote only one name, V. Krishnamurhty. I just couldn’t believe. I thought I had written his name owing to my personal fancies and regards for him. But it was not all that had happened. The climax came when the British faculty had shown his slip of paper to us. We could read the same name on his slip too. Nostalgia filled inside me. My homesickness aggravated hearing the name of the management wizard of my country, who was globally recognized, and honoured.</p>
<p>His words about managing change, which had appeared to me so casual earlier, slipped into wisdom.</p>
<p>
<em>Only they will survive into future, who know how to change </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>The world of hierarchy has come to an end. Don’t fight with it. Let it disintegrate </em>
</p>
<p>– Eugene Kennedy</p>
<p>
<strong>Great intelligence seems to be vague </strong>
</p>
<p>n Indian Hindi film ‘Kagaz ke phool’ was a</p>
<p>miserable failure on the box office. The film that flopped was one of the best creations of the cine genius, Guru Dutt, cried the critics. I didn’t appreciate it at all when I saw it along with my college friends, then. The same film when I saw later after a decade, I just wondered how it could have failed! Perhaps Guru Dutt tried to convey to the viewers before they attained the maturity required for art films.</p>
<p>Today, delayering, flatter organization, networking, downsizing, flower structure, flatter pyramid do not remain mere buzzwords. The flatter organization is the need of the day to keep pace with the changing global scenario. We quote Toffler and John Naisbitt of Third wave and Megatrends as the management gurus who saw the future a decade early.</p>
<p>While carrying out an HRD mission on delayering during my HMT days, I could not forget an Indian Management wizard who will like Guru Dutt of Kagaz ke</p>
<p>Phool had tried to carry the lofty concepts much ahead of time and had failed.</p>
<p>He was S V S Raghavan, the then Chairman and Managing Director of the Nava Ratana Company, BHEL. He was a genius and great visionary. His ideas failed because he was much ahead of the time. He had tried to convince his fellow directors of, what he had called as hierarchy-less organization, in the early seventies – years before Toffler or Naisbitt or Peter Drucker orTom Peters had made a prophecy. His idea of hierarchy-less organization was laughed out by his own fellow directors and general managers. He was hurt. He wrote personal letters to each of them perhaps only to get further negative response. Had he got a little bit of cooperation, he would have been an outrider. Today I comprehend the wisdom:</p>
<p>
<em>Novel thoughts often appea</em>
<em>r </em>
<em>foolish to those who live i</em>
<em>n </em>
<em>a fool’s paradise. They are sinner</em>
<em>s </em>
<em>who kill the baby in the mother’s wom</em>
<em>b </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>After crosses and losses men grow humble and wise </em>
</p>
<p>– Benjamin Franklin</p>
<p>
<strong>Dig anywhere in the earth and you will find a treasure; only you must dig with the faith of a peasant </strong>
</p>
<p>t was a festive occasion at IIM Bangalore. The</p>
<p>tailor-made Management Programme for the technologists was being inaugurated. My presence was more than to honour the invitation – it had wider dimensions. Five technologists from my company were sponsored for this on-year especially designed post-graduation programme. I was keenly involved.</p>
<p>The Chief guest somehow couldn’t make it. The responsibility of keynote address was shifted to another speaker. Obviously, the audience didn’t expect much from the surrogate.The speaker spoke amazingly well, punctuating speech with humility. I was profoundly impressed.</p>
<p>On my return, I decided to write a letter to him, expressing my appreciation. I wrote, his was one of the rare talks I had heard. I expected a warm and quick response. Days and weeks passed. I didn’t get the response. When hope disappeared, like a fresh breeze came his humble words in</p>
<p>print to convince me that the enchantment that I found in his verbal thoughts equally persisted in his aesthetic prose. I forgot all the moans and laments caused by his belated response. What caused solace, was again his humility. The humble words whizzed the hex:</p>
<p>‘I took sometimes to reply because it is not easy to respond to a letter so rich in ideas and concepts. With people of erudition – poets, playwrights, men of letters like yourself in the audience, I should be careful in what I speak!’</p>
<p>I was myself sobered by his humility. He had so humbly assigned his memorable talk to the high quality of the audience. Angling wisdom in his humility, I comprehended:</p>
<p>
<em>Humility is like an ocean — greatness lies in its tranquillity </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>There is no right way to do a wrong thing ! </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>The vision makes way </strong>
</p>
<p><span><sub>“</sub></span>When the sea was calm All ships alike showed mastership in floating.”</p>
<p>The Shakespearean thought raises the basic question, <em>Is the sea calm? </em></p>
<p>Today, <em>all ships alike cannot show mastership in floating</em>? The reason is simple – the sea is not calm.Those with superior quality alone can float. <em>Quality</em> is the watchword.</p>
<p>November month is commemorated as the Quality Month every year. On the first day of November, everyone takes a quality oath. 1<span><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-">st<\/a><\/sup></span> November, 1993 was one such day. We had all gathered to perform the oath taking ceremony.</p>
<p>“I solemnly pledge to devote and rededicate myself whole heartedly to achieve ever higher standards of quality by doing my job right first time, next time and every time,” the Chairman read the printed text loudly taxing his vocal</p>
<p>chord and then everyone started repeating. I also joined the chorus, muttering a few words and swallowing the rest. The part of oath – doing my job right – had raised the basic doubt in my mind. Many bells started ringing in my mind.</p>
<p>Is it ‘doing the thing right’ or ‘doing the right things’? I was struck. If the activity itself is not right, how does it make sense, if it performed right? I recollected the phrase I had read the other day – <em>there is no right way to do a wrong thing. </em>Thus, if a thing is not right, what matters if it is done right? To my mind, before we do the things right, more important is to do the right things first. An activity, which is not productive does not and cannot add any value even it is carried out ‘right first time, next time and all the time’. On the contrary, increase in the productivity of non-productive activity will only lead to some sort of value reduction. Driving fast towards East will only add more distance to the journey, if the destination happens to be towards West – higher is the speed, greater will be the distance. John Simpson’s <em>blank page </em>logic started casting wisdom.</p>
<p>
<em>The key thing is flowchartin</em>
<em>g </em>
<em>all the processes. At each tim</em>
<em>e </em>
<em>you ask about 10 times – I</em>
<em>s </em>
<em>that adding value for the Customer?</em>
<em>” </em>
<em>Doing right things should dominee</em>
<em>r </em>
<em>doing things right</em>
<em>! </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>Let noble thoughts come to all from all sides </em>
</p>
<p>– Rig Veda</p>
<p>
<strong>Never accept failure, no matter how often it visits you </strong>
</p>
<p>t was amazing to hear the background of a</p>
<p>memorable film featuring the veteran Indian cine artiste, Balraj Sahani, who was delivering a valedictory speech at convocation. It was the initial stage of my professional career. For sure, the word Empowerment was not coined then. Peter Block or Tom Peters were unheard of. The film artiste narrated an incident to underscore the power of involvement:</p>
<p>
<em>It was a difficult scene – the climax scene of a film where the hero watches helplessly his poor father dying of hunger on the street under a lamp post. The director – Bimal Ray – was not able to get the required emotional punch while the camera was covering my close-up. More than ten takes had gone waste. The director was disappointed and I was nervous with a strange feeling of professional remorse. </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>At last I gave my best and the director Okayed the shot. Everyone came and hugged me for the best performance. But perhaps luck was not with us. The shot had gone waste because </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>in the anxiety to get the best expression from the hero they had forgotten to ensure that the lamp was burning. In a dark street without the lamp on, the source of light could not be justified to the viewers. Obviously, the actual shot was taken under the heavy flashlights. Everyone was disappointed when the director finally gave the call in disgust to ‘pack up’. </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>In this hour of disappointment, a Light-boy stood up in courage and told confidently that the shot could be salvaged. </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>“Show an entry of a posh car, with its head lights on, zooming in. Cut the scene and again cover the car which takes a turn and zooms out,” suggested the Light-boy. We just couldn’t understand what he was trying to say. The hovering silence induced him to explain further. He clarified after a brief pause. </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>“On the editing table the scene will be salvaged by proper sequencing. First a posh car enters. This provides the ‘light source’ to the scene. Then, the drama takes place. After the drama is over, edit the shot showing the car taking turn and zooming out. Besides providing the ‘source of light’ to the scene, the zooming car taking a turn and vanishing in the darkness uncaring for a dying old fellow, will provide richness and contrast effect.” </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>Everyone was wonder-struck. The solution came from an ‘ordinary’ Light-boy. The director was in tears of joy – not for salvaging the scene, but for possessing such a rich human asset! The open culture cultivated by the great director, gave him the </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>real returns. The involvement of a light-man synergized the entire team. We decided to go for the next scene, though the dying night was at its descent.’ </em>
</p>
<p>A few decades have passed. I can’t forget the message given by a monk, who was only a film actor to most of us:</p>
<p>
<em>Synergy emerges from participation </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Success comes to those who dare and act </strong>
</p>
<p>cannot forget the management Monk, who</p>
<p>gave me the key to success. Way back in mid seventies, I had the opportunity to learn from him. He was a general manager, then and assigned with a turnkey thermal project. He was known for his successful track record. I was always attracted by his sermons on risk taking. “Break the rules if they stumble the goal,” was the motif of his preaching.</p>
<p>“Learn to take risks,” once he told me during one such management meditation session.</p>
<p>“To what extent one should take risk?” I asked.</p>
<p>“To the extent that it might cost one’s job,” was his spontaneous reply. He paused and said, “But he will not lose his job, I can assure you. Bona fide risks, resulting in mistakes are never punished. But even slight erring with malice is not pardonable. These are the fundamental principles of good Management.”</p>
<p>“But what if even the bona fide risk really costs someone his job?’ I asked.</p>
<p>“So what! One who takes risks must also be willing to pay the price. The risk-taking message is not meant for those who keep an eye on the dangling career. But those who punish the bona fide risk takers are the guys grown beyond their competence. For the sake of such ignorant corporate bureaucrats, one need not wear the security jacket and sweat unnecessarily.”</p>
<p>I always followed his message. Many a time I have broken rules and refused to follow the beaten track. I got success. Touchwood, I never lost my job. While taking professional risks, I ask myself three questions:</p>
<p>(1) “Are you willing, if it costs the present assignment?”</p>
<p>(2) “Are you willing, if it costs you the present place of posting?”</p>
<p>(3) “Are you willing, if it costs you the present job?”</p>
<p>If my heart signals affirm all the three times, even a shred of hesitation doesn’t touch my risk taking spirit.</p>
<p>Almost two decades have passed. Never had I an iota of doubt the truthfulness of his message as the key to success. But somehow, I couldn’t comprehend the true wisdom.</p>
<p>Yesterday when I was going through an ad of a Management consultancy services on the power of entrepreneurship, claiming, “We find solutions the way Alexander did”, I couldn’t help remembering the great management monk of Macedonia, while insight began winking to me.</p>
<p>Thousands of years ago in ancient Greece, the story went that whoever united the ‘Gordian Knot’ would rule all of Asia. After many a King and Emperor had tried and failed, young Alexander stepped forward. He simply unsheathed his sword and cut the knot with a powerful stroke. The rest is history – Asia fated to him.</p>
<p>Following the beaten track is not a sound management practice. Go on searching new tracks, not sometimes, always!</p>
<p>
<em>One must come out of his ow</em>
<em>n </em>
<em>mental block first – the Knot</em>
<em>, </em>
<em>which he sees in the issue a</em>
<em>s </em>
<em>a problem in fact lies in hi</em>
<em>s </em>
<em>own stomac</em>
<em>h </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>It takes time to grow in wisdom </strong>
</p>
<p>e was a strange duck! His mind was more adult than some adults I know.</p>
<p>Known popularly as PR (PR Chandrasekhar), he was the Coordinator representing over thirty unions of the company at the corporate level. I had a complete rapport with him – support each other to further company’s interest, was the implicit divine understanding.</p>
<p>It was the time when our company, HMT, was bleeding. We have arrived syndrome was one of the killing factors. Since our products were being sold like hot cake, the complacency kept us in deep slumber, driving us away from the nanosecond changing trends.</p>
<p>It seemed clear to me that the bowl of jelly was going to shake when the profits started declining. My HRD strategies – Empowerment, Benchmarking, Learning</p>
<p>Organization, BPR… — didn’t work anymore. I was perhaps trying to pull a loaded truck with a string! Or the prioritizing of the strategies was imperfect. I was unsure, what stood in my way? A vague something!</p>
<p>I’ll admit. I awfully get frustrated when something stands in my way. Or I get angry when what I want to do is threatened. But that’s the mood of the game!</p>
<p>On one such uncool morning PR came to me and as usual opened his diary to discuss the various Industrial Relations problems. Stay put, I decided.</p>
<p>“PR, I want your signature on a blank paper,” I bluntly made a wild request. I was hoping he knew that was frustration in my voice, not anger.</p>
<p>PR flashed a grin at me, a look completely unguarded. He took the paper from my hand and put his signature.</p>
<p>“Will you not ask, what I’m going to write on this?”</p>
<p>“Not necessary to know,” he didn’t take his eyes off the blank A4. “I’ll deny that to anybody but you. I’m sure, it will be in the company’s best interest.” His confidence was unshaken. Didn’t he know, It’s not too smart to trust the jailer? Trust subordinates apprehensions, the second moment I realized.</p>
<p>I asked Shashikala, my Secretary, to read out the text, which I dictated to her a short while ago. It was the replica of what I wrote just last week. She read out the main text – it was a declaration allowing the management to deduct some money from one’s salary.</p>
<p>“The company needs blood; I sincerely share the concern and anxiety of management. I voluntarily opt for withdrawal of the increment that I earned last and allow recovery in even installments as a humble gesture to contribute my bit. Further, I surrender my ensuing increment in favour of management.’’</p>
<p>“Great!” He stopped her short. “Didn’t I say, for sure it will be in the interest of the company! How can we ask others to give their blood if we don’t give our pint first.” Then he asked Shashikala to go ahead. She was just stunned. It must have rained in her desert!</p>
<p>And then, we road-mapped – infuse soul into our HRD strategies was the central tenet. We needed the basic guideposts and not a project report. We needed to throw ourselves into a frenzy of emergency measures to stop the bleeding and keep the company breathing first.</p>
<p>
<strong>OUR CREDO </strong>
</p>
<ul>
<li>Stop bleeding and keep breathing </li>
<li>First, beat our Yesterday </li>
<li>Let each employee understand Today </li>
<li>Then, and then alone look at Tomorrow </li>
<li>Try to be better than oneself than to be better than others; soul searching and benchmarking </li>
<li>Holding the company to highly demanding short term standards, simultaneously build the first and foremost long term plans and strategies </li>
<li>Discover (not invent) the core values and the core purpose of the company – What we stand for? Why we exist? </li>
<li>Prioritize: People. Product, Profit </li>
</ul>
<p>• Preserve the core; stimulate progress; carry on… We looked at each other. We listened to each other’s mind without the tyranny of words!</p>
<p>It takes time to grow in wisdom, I realized. And growing in wisdom is not the management’s franchise. An anchor of light dropped! The air was saying:</p>
<p>
<em>Let only such people stay to lead who do not believe in thinking small! </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>I am the flame and I am the dry-brush and one part of me consumes the other part </strong>
</p>
<p>was fortunate to have been blessed with noble</p>
<p>bosses all through my career, all right! I admit it that is an overstatement — there were a few exceptions. Like a bouquet is complete only after a couple of flowers are pointing in the other direction; so was these couple of bosses that were tangent to others, but still completed by bouquet of managers. In managing such ‘difficult bosses’ one doesn’t realize the immense learning being imparted by them. I agree with Norman Schwarzkopf, who observes, “You learn far more from negative leadership than from positive leadership. Because you learn ‘How not to do it’, and, therefore, you learn ‘How to do it.”</p>
<p>When it comes to cherry-picking my best boss, the smiling face of Mr. N Ramanuja dawns on me. He was an all-rounder - A marketing person, with forte in marketing</p>
<p>HMT<span><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-">1<\/a><\/sup></span> machines. Then he was given the challenging assignment of HMT (International) for global marketing and he phenomenally outperformed. Before he was selected as Chairman and Managing Director of HMT, he was given the assignments of Director Watches, Corporate Planning. Unlike pervious CEOs, most of whom had an organic scaling, Ramanuja had an exponential career growth spanning diverse experience, making him an ideal suitor for chairmanship of a company like HMT, that had evolved from making machine tools to tractors, lamps, watches and bearings to cutting edge CNC machines.</p>
<p>When my first book ‘The Brave New Manager’ was adjudged by IIMA as the best book of the year - 1995, he wrote a letter congratulating and motivating me to write more such books in future. And write I did!</p>
<p>Upon breaking the news of me being selected by PESB (Public Enterprise Selection Board) as Director (HR) for BEML (Bharat Earth Movers Limited), another public sector company in Bangalore, he seemed happy and sad at the same time — Happy for my selection as a director and sad for my departure from his team.</p>
<p>“Sir, we meet to part and we part to meet; but before I</p>
<p>depart I would like to do something unique for HMT,” I don’t know what prompted me to make this proposition? Perhaps, it was my deep love for the company and the abundant reverence for the great man.</p>
<p>He knew my style and rapidly retorted, gazing into my eyes, “Great! So can you help close down the HMT Lamps unit before you leave?” HMT Lamps was an ailing unit that was eroding the profitability of the company – the accumulated losses had soared to the level of over Rs. 270 crore. There were no signs of recovery. The management wanted to close down this plant, long ago if not for the far reaching legal and social consequences, and the trade union pressure made the challenge insurmountable. No labour department would give you the permission on a platter, to close down a public sector company, let alone the government giving any support. The condition had become so precarious that the unions of other profit making factories of watches and machine tools were making protests if their funds were diverted for running the loss making Lamps factory. The earlier CEOs also wished to close it down, but they did not have the required guts and courage to take initiative.</p>
<p>“Sir, I accept the challenge!” was my firm assurance to him.</p>
<p>Step one - I suggested, instead of a legal ‘Closer’ simply give all workers a paid holiday. Paying salaries, without running the factory, workers’ canteen, fleet of busses worked out to be cheaper! The management was convinced, but with a caveat that we find a permanent solution as this was but a short-term fix. So, we sent the workers on a paid holiday of sorts while I continued to find the solution of closing the factory amicably.</p>
<p>Given the labour laws and political climate, in the country I knew it would be rather suicidal to close down a public sector company with a flick. Mr. Ramanjua expected that I would move from our Corporate Office in Bangalore and camp in Hyderabad, where HMT Lamps factory was located to begin the dialogue with the unions. But somehow I had gut feeling that the industrial relations situation was not favourable to open a dialogue with them on such a crucial issue. <em>When you are at the receiving-end, you must first gain the position of strength before you decide to call the shots</em>. I meticulously followed this principle for managing Industrial Relations.</p>
<p>A month passed and Mr. Ramanuja spoke to me while on a business trip in the then Bombay. “Siddiqui Saheb, are you still in Bangalore?”</p>
<p>“Yes,” I stated.</p>
<p>“No plans to camp at Hyderabad?”</p>
<p>“No, sir,” again I gave a brief answer.</p>
<p>“It means my ‘Brave New Manager’ is now scared?” he said wittingly.</p>
<p>“You may take that way, sir,” I said, without elaborating any justification. Behind his chuckle I sensed his thinking, that I may no longer be interested to take on such a grave risk, especially while I was waiting for my orders for posting as Director HR, in another company. </p>
<p>As mentioned, the truth of the matter was — I was waiting for an opportune time, where I could have gained the equal position with the unions, if not greater, to sit before them face-to-face to begin the crucial dialogue. A few more days had passed.</p>
<p>At 11 pm one night, I got a call from VS Raju, Deputy General Manager (HR), HMT Hyderabad, reporting that following some instigating speeches in support of the workers (read voters) by the local MLA and the union leaders, the workers had gone rough and damaged the buses and company property. They had also burnt the effigies of corporate</p>
<p>directors and chairman, he added. I registered the situation differently — having committed such mistake, it was easy for me to draw the union leaders on the <em>negotiation table</em>.</p>
<p>I thought for a while and called my Chairman apprising him of the events in HMT Lamps Hyderabad. “So what! Why are you so upset? Ask them to burn more effigies. I don’t care,” he murmured half asleep.</p>
<p>“No sir, I didn’t call for simply conveying this news. I have disturbed you to inform that <em>the time has come to begin the dialogue! </em>Having committed such mistake of creating the law and order situation, their morale can be brought down if we take a serious action against the mischief mongers, including he union leaders.<em>” </em>He agreed and offered his full support to deal the situation fairly and firmly.</p>
<p>I called Raju and instructed him to summon the General Manager and all HODs into the factory and wait for the instructions of Chairman. Once he confirmed that the general manager and HODs had been pulled out from their beds in the dead of the night and were all seated in the boardroom, I asked Raju to issue the mass suspension orders to all those union leaders who were involved in instigating the workers resulting in damage of company property and burning of the effigy of the CMD.</p>
<p>Raju asked nervously, “You know, what you are asking for, sir?”</p>
<p>“Well these are the orders of Mr. Ramanuja, Chairman and Managing Director; we simply follow them and not ponder upon them,” I commanded.</p>
<p>Later that night I learnt that ten union leaders, who were involved in creating violence were placed under suspension. They were available there as they were on a ‘Dharna’ against the management in front of the factory. It was a courageous act of Raju, I admired him and assured him that I would be on the next flight to Hyderabad in the morning.</p>
<p>When I landed in Hyderabad, Raju shared that the General Manager of HMT lamps and many department heads were assaulted by the union leaders. He added that they had even damaged the furniture of the GM’s office. He also informed that police had been summoned, who was currently guarding the factory. When you take action against union leaders such aggression is quite expected. I was not surprised.</p>
<p>When I reached the factory, police escorted me to visit the places where they had smashed the office furniture and</p>
<p>so I took some pictures for my record. I had also taken the statements of the general manager and others who were assaulted by the union. This was the tipping point that triggered me to seek permission from my chairman to declare a ‘Lock Out’, should the situation worsen. He understood the gravity and asked me to take the judicious decision as the situation demands. After lunch, I was told that the union has removed their ‘tent’ and withdrawn the <em>dharna</em> as the gossip was dissemination of the possibility of a ‘Lock Out’. By evening I got the information that all senior union leaders had moved to Delhi along with the local MLA to approach the Industrial Minister demanding my termination.</p>
<p>The next morning I returned to Bangalore and apprised the Chairman of the situation at hand. Disappointingly, I fell sick the next day and was admitted to the company’s hospital. Having diagnosed for ‘Typhoid’ the doctors prescribed a restricted diet and complete bed rest. In evening, I received the call from Mr Ramanuja. Initially he enquired about my health, wished me an early recovery and then mentioned the new twist in the saga; The Industrial Minister had summoned him tomorrow. He hesitantly probed if I could accompany him? Without any reluctance I agreed to join him. Knowing my nature I guess he anticipated the outcome, for he was audibly pleased.</p>
<p>The following day we were in the waiting room of the Industrial Minister. In the adjacent room we could hear our adversaries — the local MLA and my union friends. Soon we were escorted inside the chamber of the minister.</p>
<p>“Sir, he is Moid Siddiqui, my HR Chief, and a renowned author,” Mr. Ramanuja introduced me to H.E. Sikender Bakhat, who was the Central Industrial Minister. He was unimpressed and maintained his angry expressions.</p>
<p>“So, he is the guy, who is creating mischief against my government!” he yelled glaring at me. Both Ramanuja and I realized that our adversaries had debriefed the minister, to their advantage<span><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-">2<\/a><\/sup></span>. . Ramanuja tried to defend me, but the minister was unwilling to hear anything in my favour.</p>
<p>It was time for me to speak up to salvage the day. Collecting my thoughts I interrupted, “Sir, may I say a few words?” The minister’s piercing gaze was akin to his angry looks and loud words, which was not very encouraging. But I had to carry on, “Sir, although our HMT Lamps factory is in dire straits, with accumulated losses touching Rs 270 crore, we have still not closed down the factory. Currently we have had to send the workers on a paid holiday, as the nonproducing factory would reduce our losses significantly. So</p>
<p>we are not running the factory yet we are paying the salary to the workmen, without going for a ‘Closure’.</p>
<p>“Is it your Pappa’s factory, that you are paying salaries without any production in the factory? How could you do so?” He bellowed yet I felt relieved. I had innocuously prompted him to say that. My CMD was calmly watching me perform, for he knew my style and had the confidence in my tackling of such thorny situations.</p>
<p>“Sir! You are very right in questioning us, on how we could use public money to pay salaries to workers without taking any work from them. However sir, on the other hand you had mentioned that I am creating mischief against your government, when infact I’m only trying to let the workers have their livelihood and stall the steep losses for the government.” He mellowed when it dawned on him that I was killing two birds with a single shot and contrary to his information, I was actually helping save jobs for his voters. As he gaped at me perplexed, I showed him the pictures that I had shot of the mess the workers had made, days earlier. He was appalled to see the real mischief done by the team of our union friends — broken furniture, smashed glasses, blood stains, burning effigies of the senior management.</p>
<p>Nothing more had to be explained to the minister, he realised that we were right in suspending the workers who had taken the law in their own hands. “You should have terminated them, I cannot tolerate such <em>goonda-giri</em> in my factories”, he retorted. The honourable minister had understood the game played by the local politicians and union leaders. He expressed his support for solving the issue. “What prevents you from taking some drastic actions – we cannot silently watch public funds draining out!”</p>
<p>“Thank you, sir, for guiding us,” I quickly presented our thanks to the minister and tried to wrap our meeting, at this very note. He asked us to deal the situation firmly. Later, he called the MLA and the union guys and whacked them for giving him an erroneous picture and misguiding him. The appalling story had taken a dramatic twist, yet again – this time to our advantage! My chairman appreciated my valour.</p>
<p>After reaching Bangalore, I was once again admitted in company’s hospital and my chairman ensured I get the best medical assistance for a quick and healthy recovery.</p>
<p>Though we didn’t inform the union leaders about what had transpired between the minister, and us they learnt from</p>
<p>their own sources that we already acquired the mandate to deal the situation firmly with an iron hand. So, after two weeks, I again reached Hyderabad and had meetings with all the shades of unions. I offered a lucrative VRS (Voluntary Retirement Scheme) and also stated that those who do not want to avail the VRS benefit could opt to be transferred to other HMT factories, spread across the country. I made it clear to them that management wants to solve the issue with ‘win-win’ approach. <em>Once you demonstrate honesty and walk the talk, unions also respond positively,</em> is my experience.</p>
<p>Without declaring a ‘Lock Out or Closure, we could solve the issue without any tears from either side. Those who got money were happy; those who opted for transfer were also happy that their ‘Naukri’ was salvaged.</p>
<p>When I received the orders for my selection as director, HR, BEML, I left HMT with full gratification. Mr. Ramanuja arranged an informal meeting and presented me a golden pocket watch, giving me the title of ‘Management Monk’, which became my new identity. I comprehended that it is not enough to be the likeness of a Brave Manager; one has got to be a Management Monk, the resemblance of sagacity and wisdom! That was the turning point in my approach, both as a manager and an author!</p>
<p>
<em>When one lives in the company of angels</em>
<em>, </em>
<em>he becomes an angel</em>
<em>; </em>
<em>when one lives in the company of devils</em>
<em>, </em>
<em>he develops the devilish tendencies</em>
<em>. </em>
<em>I was lucky to have many angelic bosses</em>
<em>, </em>
<em>whom I’m indebted to</em>
<em>! </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Footnotes </strong>
</p>
<p>1. HMT Incorporated in 1953 by the Government of India as a Machine Tool manufacturing company. Over the years diversified into Watches, Tractors, Printing Machinery, Metal Forming Presses, Die Casting & Plastic Processing</p>
<table>
<tr>
<th>Machinery, CNC Systems & Bearings. </th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>2. Later </th>
<td>we learnt, </td>
<td>that </td>
<td>our adversaries had made the honorable minister to </td>
<td>
<strong>Preserve the core ; </strong>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>believe that that being a Muslim, I was out to defame his party. </th>
<td>
<strong>stimulate the progress </strong>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>uring the sixth century BC, the Chinese life philosophy sprang from two pure fountainheads</p>
<p>– Taoism and Confucianism. Lao Tzu and Kung Fu Tzu (popularly known as Confucius) brought the unexampled balance to the humankind, one preaching stillness, while the other movement! One called to people’s attention to intuition, the other gave emphasis to reasoning. One taught sagacity in tranquility, the other virtue in action — Yin and Yang! </p>
<p>Then, there was another great soul – Chuang Tzu, born a 100 years later. He was Lao Tzu’s disciple. It was he whose famous sentence fondly quoted today: “By their stillness become Sages; by their movements, Kings.” They were the great sons of Ancient China who cultivated the Chinese Vista. On one hand Lao Tzu and Chaung Tzu emphasized</p>
<p>‘intuitive values’ and ‘intangibles’ and on the other, Confucius gave his sermons on logic and reasoning. Today we would say that the former used the right side of the brain and the latter, the left side.</p>
<p>The Chinese vista of cosmic universal equilibrium is a unique blend of intuitive wisdom and practical knowledge based on logic and reasoning, which the Chinese have associated with the images of the sage and of the king. Such a balanced mix is peerless and hardly witnessed in any epoch! The Chinese sagacity is filled with both, spiritualism as well as worldly affairs.</p>
<p>The Chinese had another added advantage – the Buddhist thoughts. Buddha was born in India, but his thoughts were accepted and adopted by Chinese wholesomely. What we call ‘Zen’ was Buddha’s philosophy of ‘Dhyana’. Further, the Fuzzy Logic was borrowed from Buddha’s philosophy of Haziness. Lotfi Zadeh, who first discovered Fuzzy Logic – the nuance between ‘Present’ and ‘Not present’ or ‘1’ and ‘0’, declared that Buddha was the first Fuzzylogist.</p>
<p>Again, what we call ‘Digital Logic’ is the product of ‘I Ching’, which is popularly known as ‘The Book of Changes’.</p>
<p>To my best knowledge the following five books are associated with Confucius;</p>
<p>I. The Spring and Autumn</p>
<p>II. The Book of Changes</p>
<p>III. The Book of Rites</p>
<dl>
<dt>IV. </dt>
<dd>The Book of Songs </dd>
<dt>V. </dt>
<dd>Analects </dd>
</dl>
<p>Yet, some believe that these books were written 500 years before Confucius was even born. Nevertheless, these books form the base of Chinese Vista.</p>
<p>‘I Ching’ or ‘The Book of Changes’ described 64 Qua (or Kua) – differing combinations of Yin and Yang, which were explained in terms of ‘line’ and a ‘broken line’. Everything in this world, including seasonal changes was explained through these Quas. Later, these 64 Quas became the bedrock of today’s Digital Logic.</p>
<p>As per ancient Chinese philosophy in the beginning the cosmos was an endless void called ‘Wu Chi’. From ‘Wu Chi’ arose activity, expressed as ‘Yang’ and inactivity, expressed as ‘Yin’. Yang and Yin can also be implied as masculine and</p>
<p>feminine characteristics. ‘Yang’ and ‘Yin’ in togetherness make the ultimate reality what is known in Chinese as ‘Tai Chi’ or ‘Tai-ji’. Symbolically Yang is shown as the unbroken line and Yin as broken line ( – ; - - ) As is obvious there can only be four combinations of the unbroken and broken lines:</p>
<p>– ; -</p>
<p>- - ; –</p>
<p>- - ; -</p>
<p>– ; –</p>
<p>There are eight Trigrams, which form 64 Quas’. The modern Digital Logic (64 bits) sprang from the ancient Quas</p>
<p>– the Chinese Vista.</p>
<p>So not only the binary number system but also the hexadecimal number system, on which we have built our computers hardware and software, are derivatives from ‘I Ching’. How many of us know this? Most people in China today may be oblivious to this discovery. This claim of mine may become the hypotheses for further scholarly studies by youngsters in future generations.</p>
<p>‘Qua’ is the seed of Digital Logic. Like the Indian ‘Dhyana’ of Buddha became the Japanese ‘Zen’, the Eastern</p>
<p>Qua of Chinese lost to Western Digital logic. While Western</p>
<p>society is working overdrive in registering their ‘Intellectual Capital’ we Indians at micro-level, and we Asians, at macrolevel are yet to wake-up to of our age old ‘intellectual capital’ — our own heritage or Vistas.</p>
<p>
<em>Protect and Preserve the India</em>
<em>n </em>
<em>heritage and Asian Vista</em>
<em>, </em>
<em>is my call through this book o</em>
<em>n </em>
<em>sagacity of management monks</em>
<em>! </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>May God grant me endless wisdom </strong>
</p>
<p>ery often Ruquiya and I visit Singapore,</p>
<p>where our son, Feroz, is settled. In the summer of 1997, during one such vacation Seema, our daughter-in-law insisted that we include Malaysia in our itinerary. We agreed and chose to travel by bus, instead of taking flight or train. The idea was to enjoy the picturesque countryside. We passed Malacca a very quite and idyllic town, where we had the most sumptuous satay and finally reached Kuala Lumpur (KL) and checked into a guesthouse.</p>
<p>KL is the federal capital and most populous city in Malaysia. One thing very typical about KL is that it is most modern and most ancient at the same time. During this maiden visit to this city of wonderful people, I found that while some parts of the city can be compared to London others reminded me of Old Delhi.</p>
<p>Three days passed quite fast, given that we had so much to see and explore. On the last day as we were walking though a car park to reach the main road to hail a cab to take us to</p>
<p>our bus station, I found a wallet fallen on the ground. My son picked it up and looked around to locate the owner, but there was none. Feroz looked for a business card of the owner, but could not find one. It contained very many hundred Ringgit currency notes. After searching many compartments within the wallet he could at last locate one driving license, three credit cards and one tattered visiting card. The name on the business card was different so it was obvious; the owner was keeping someone else’s business card for reference. Fortunately, the landline number was visible on the card. Though we could find the name of the owner on the driving license and credit cards, but could not find his mobile number. We could also see his photo on these documents.</p>
<p>We didn’t know what to do. There was not much time left for us to catch the bus to Singapore. I suggested going to police station and pass on the buck. My son was not sure if that was the best thing to do given the reputation of the local police. I looked at the watch and suggested to throw the purse at the place we located it and move along. But my son and daughter-in-law were bent upon to locate the owner. Seema, my daughter-in-law chose to take the lead. She dialed the number she found on the business card. He was a professor in one of the Management institutes of KL. He couldn’t recollect the person when Seema mentioned to him the name she found on the driving license and credit cards.</p>
<p> Disappointedly Seema narrated the entire episode and requested for his help. He faintly recollected that there was one student with that particular name in his MBA (evening)</p>
<p>classes. But he didn’t know his telephone number. He suggested contacting a particular college, where the professor was conducting the evening classes.</p>
<p>With every call the matter only kept getting more knotty. With time not on our side, I knew it was cutting too fine, if we continue the efforts to locate the guy for sure we were going to miss the bus. But, both my son and daughterin-law were quite clear in their mind – <em>we shall locate the guy even if costs missing the bus</em>.Their stand was we can get another bus but this person shall not get his wallet back, if not for our assistance. </p>
<p>Seema then called the college, where the receptionist was not very helpful. He was not willing to take the trouble to go to the class and make the announcement to locate the guy. But when Seema mentioned the name of the professor, he became energetic. He collected Seema’s mobile number and promised to come back. We could not afford any more delay. We took a cab and rushed to the bus station. The bus was all set to leave, but we still hadn’t got any call from the college.</p>
<p>Finally Seema’s cell rang – wow! It was the call from the owner. He was very thankful to all the trouble that she took to locate him. Finally he asked where could he come to pick it? My son told Seema to ask him to rush to Puduraya bus station and look for him near the ‘H’ row. Seema also gave him some portrayal enough to spot Feroz and also the bus number emphasizing the urgency, as the bus was about to leave. He assured to be there shortly.</p>
<p>We occupied our seats on the bus while Feroz stood near the ‘H’ row in the overcrowded bus terminal, looking for the guy. Fifteen minutes passed but there was no sign of the owner of the wallet. On our request the bus conductor agreed to delay the bus by another five minutes. The grace time was over, but the owner couldn’t be seen anywhere in the H row. We were under pressure from the passengers, who were getting restless in waiting pointlessly any further.</p>
<p>As it happens at work – it was time to take the decision and call the shots. My son declared – “Seema, you will accompany Pappa and Mamma, while I shall stay here to return the wallet to its rightful owner. Don’t worry, I will catch the next bus to Singapore.” She agreed without hesitation. Feroz was so decisive that it would have been rather vain for me to object.</p>
<p>Like in Bollywood films, as the bus moved, we saw a guy rushing towards the bus. Surely it was the guy we were waiting for. Upon our request the bus was stopped. I jumped from the bus and ran to inform my son that the guy was here. Perhaps, Feroz could also tell with the bus halting suddenly, that our guest had arrived, as I saw him rushing back towards the bus.</p>
<p>Feroz quickly passed the wallet to the guy, who was gasping harder than my son and I. He probably had many words of thanks in his mouth, but given the short time his eyes did the talking. Feroz dashed into the moving bus, followed by me. The mission impossible became possible,</p>
<p>owing to firm decision and determined mind of Feroz and Seema. Some of the co-passengers gave a clap while other a pat to Feroz.</p>
<p>Soon after we settled down, we received the call from this person. He was extremely thankful and seemed obliged to extend a reward, which both Feroz and Seema wouldn’t accede to. Their reward was the joy that I could see on their faces. Their sweat didn’t go to waste – the wallet had gone to the right owner and that’s all that mattered. What Feroz and Seema exhibited was just one step in the right direction towards living a fulfilling life; by making a difference; by paying it forward!</p>
<p>Later when I asked Feroz what motivated him to be so determined in achieving the success of this noble mission, he remarked, “I always put myself in other’s shoes to sense the situation at hand and then act upon what I feel would be apt to do”. Simply put, he was just following his heart. So, when was the last time you listened to your heart’s whispers?</p>
<p>
<em>Leave your footprints on the sands of the time. When you are gone people, must remember you with respect and not contempt </em>
</p>
<p>he dawn of the new millennium marked a</p>
<p>change in my corporate life. I joined a private sector company – Nagarjuna Group – as Executive Vice President, Human Potential Development. KS Raju was the Managing Director. Calling <em>human asset</em> as one of the resources was not akin to his value system. Human beings are a reservoir of infinite human potential was his belief. My two years of association with KS was a great stride in the development of the monk in me<em>.</em> I understood that KS acquired many of him values, especially spiritual management from his father KVK.</p>
<p>The daily morning meeting of ‘Nav-Ratna’— the Top Nine senior management — was almost obligatory for us. Half an hour before the stipulated time we were supposed to assemble and mingle — none was allowed to discuss any</p>
<p>official issue during these thirty minutes. So we were encouraged to discuss family, nurture ideas and share our interests, anything but work!</p>
<p>One morning we were discussing the changing ‘business character’ where ‘business ideology’ would call shots, pushing ‘business strategies’ to the backseat. The values of the company should not change, but the business strategies can change, rather should change as per the changing pattern of business character. Whereas the former is ‘Core’, the latter is ‘Non-core’. A value-based company must continually remind itself of crucial distinction between ‘What should never change and what should be open to change.’ The core values must form a rock-solid foundation and must not drift with the changing trends. While keeping the core ideology tightly fixed, the value-based companies must display a powerful drive for progress that enables them to change and adapt without compromising their cherished core ideology. Articulating a ‘Vision’ or defining the ‘Mission’ is not enough, what is more important is seeing them in action.</p>
<p>I began to share my thoughts, saying, “A high profile, charismatic style is clearly not required for building the ‘business ideology”. How well the organzation brings out</p>
<p>the great energies and talents of its people with focus on its value system will determine the long-term growth and sustainable success. In a value-based company, the core values don’t need any rational or supporting justification”. After a pause I added, “Nor should the company shift its focus in response to changing marketing conditions.”</p>
<p>The thought process continued, as KS watched calmly. He is known for being an avid listener’.</p>
<p>Many thoughts came about but somehow I had a feeling they were blurred and hazy, lacking clarity; everyone was simply beating about the bush! KS Raju, the Chairman, Nagarjuna Group got up and wrote a simple sentence on the white board:</p>
<p>
<em>“Internal Clarity leads to External Solutions!” </em>
</p>
<p>This solitary statement restored our blurred vision. What we say, ‘business ideology’ stays in your inner self; what we call, ‘business character’ is the demonstrable part, which can be seen. Your business ideology must mold your business character and not the other way around. It is so simple and vivid! </p>
<p>We realised that making internal changes to</p>
<p>accommodate external change is reactive, thus a well-crafted, well-managed strategic vision can help balance reactive and proactive changes.</p>
<p>Wisdom struck to me – ‘the ancient sagacity will lead the modern corporate world’. Whom we recall as a Sage, Saint or Sufi, were yesteryears’ spiritual scientists whose wisdom holds water even to this modern day. Unlike Physicists, whose theories are respected and overturned by a ‘New’ theory, years later. This is because the Sages do not see reality externally, they see beyond the five sensory perceptions.</p>
<p>Simply said, the Sufi and Saints knew that — to look without is to see only the outer shell; to look within is to see the real kernel. If we only look without, we are the slaves of external objects; but if we look within, we break free and become the master of those objects. So they look within; to discover what is without.</p>
<p>
<em>Shape your business ideolog</em>
<em>y </em>
<em>and follow it scrupulously</em>
<em>; </em>
<em>the business character will shape itsel</em>
<em>f </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Trickery succeeds sometimes, but it always commits suicide </strong>
</p>
<p>oday it is amazing to see the political <em>Tamasha </em></p>
<p>on the idiot box against corruption in the name of Lokpal Bill. Sometimes the activists, sometimes the dismissed <em>fouji</em> and sometimes the Yogic experts appear on the TV. Everyone, right from ruling party to opposition to the anticorruption movement activists claim themselves to be the <em>Gandhiwadi</em> — the followers of Gandhian philosophy. Mahatma Gandhi’s philosophy has lost the shape of its cap, as everyone is trying to wear it. While many who gather there are true nationalists, some people – paid or not – assemble with different motives as the silent majority laughs in their sleeves. Some youngster gather there for fun hoping to be caught on camera and make good their maiden appearance on the small screen, while others see it as their own version of ‘tahrir’ square revolution, that could change the face of the country. <em>Everyone is in his humour!</em> If legislation alone could bring honesty and morality; wiping out corruption, this mammoth would have been extinct long ago.</p>
<p>I recall an incident during my NHPC days in the early 1980s. At a management-union meeting, the union was pounding the management for everything. Among others charging the management for some corrupt practices. Nirdoshi, the general secretary of AITUC union blamed saying, “It is the job of the general manager to see that corruption is eradicated from its roots.” A S Chatrat, general manager Baira Suil Project, who was known for his sharp remarks and wit, retorted, “Nirdoshi ji, don’t blame me or anyone for the prevailing corruption. Let us blame each of the Indian voter that could not elect a handful honest Parliamentarians. If we elect just 500 honest people, the country’s face would change!” How true! We elect many corrupt people and expect honesty from them.</p>
<p>Today in India we see inspite of the lokpal ‘halla-gullah’ there continues to be a general lack of engagement between the government and civil society as repression, corruption throughout the government ranks, often spilling over into the private sector.</p>
<p>In my view the first step we need to take is to benchmark ourselves against the rest of the world. Thankfully we do not appear on the top 20 most corrupt countries of the world (though some of our neighbours do, from time to time). It is high time that we learn from the top 5 or 10 least corrupt courtiers of the world. Let there be a think-tank formed comprising of our intelligentsia (professors, students and people from the judiciary, etc.) who can venture out to these</p>
<p>countries and understand their success stories and learn from it.</p>
<p>What was it that New Zealand, Singapore, Austria, Switzerland, Finland, Norway, Sweden, or Denmark got it right to be listed in the top 10 least corrupt countries of the world. If we take our closest neighbour Singapore - an Asian country, as an example, we realize that it all started as a vision by a single leader who had a dream of creating a country that was rid of corruption. Certainly Lee Kuan Yew commenced by making the law tough on criminals and then ensuring enforcement of such tough laws was carried out that is more challenging an act then the stroke of a pen. This transformation called for not just courage, commitment and passion, but above all – sacrifice. In time, come rain or shine the rule of the law prevailed and voila you have Singapore – A brand that is not organic but in it lays the sweat and blood of its people that made this happen.</p>
<p>In his book - “The Singapore Story”, Lee Kuan Yew describes how he fought corruption — He gave handsome salaries to his ministers so that they can live a good but honest life, without being lured to the dark side of the law. He made punishments harsh and fair for all. This evoked many a sacrifice — Friends turned to foe, when they were declined the favour of pardon or ‘blessing’ as we know it in India, but he didn’t deviate from the chosen path.</p>
<p>Lee’s acid test came when his colleagueTeh Cheang Wan,</p>
<p>an architect who was in charge of the Housing Development Board as the Minister for National Development of Singapore, was investigated for corruption by the Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau for accepting two bribes of $500, 000 each in 1981 and 1982. In November 1986, as the prime minister of Singapore Lee Kuan Yew approved an open investigation on his alleged corruption. First he denied, then later he wanted to meet Kuan Yew, but Lee replied that he would not see him until the investigations were over. Though Teh maintained his innocence, he committed suicide before being charged for the offences, on December 14, 1986. In his suicide note, addressed to the PM, Teh wrote;</p>
<p>“I have been feeling very sad and depressed for the last two weeks. I feel responsible for the occurrence of this unfortunate incident and I feel I should accept full responsibility. As an honourable oriental gentleman I feel it is only right that I should pay the highest penalty for my mistake.”</p>
<p>So, it was not an easy task to keep the government clean. The mission demanded many such sacrifices that Lee had to make to keep his conviction alive and vibrant. There was no other way to do what he did.</p>
<p>Today India is bankrupt in terms of honest political leaders, but just after independence we had great souls like Mahatma Gandhi, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, Lal Bahdur Shastry, Maulana Azad, Ram Manohar Lohia, and several</p>
<p>unsung honest and committed leaders.Those were the golden days! </p>
<p>I recollect one such incident that was shared with me by the former President of India, Dr Shankerdayal Sharma about the clean government of Pt. Jawaharlal Nehru. I knew Sharmaji when he was a professor in Hamidia College, Bhopal from where I graduated. He was also Cabinet (MP) colleague of Mr. A Q Siddiqui, my wife’s grandfather. We last called upon Sharmaji, while he was the Governor of Andhra Pradesh. He narrated that once Pundit Nehru noticed one of his Cabinet Ministers wearing an ‘imported watch’ – The next day the minister tendered his resignation. During those days, as per the policy of the government, ‘import’ of watches was not permissible. Obviously, the minister was wearing a watch that was smuggled to India. Such was the moral high grounds just a half century ago in India.</p>
<p>
<em>Honesty and morality </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>is nurtured not brought </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>about through legislations! </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Under heaven all can see beauty as beauty only because there is ugliness </strong>
</p>
<p>hugged him in my imagination…’ the well</p>
<p>pitched and well-modulated voice of KS echoed in the conference hall of Fairmont Hotel in San Francisco. When KS speaks about spirituality, he always speaks from his heart.</p>
<p>The session was on ‘The Universe Within’. It was part of a ten-day spiritual convention on ‘Creating a Sustainable Compassionate Society and Culture of Peace’, where more than eighty per cent of the delegates were from the corporate world. The panel of experts that included both spiritual celebrities and renowned scientists, after sharing their thoughts, invited the participants to share some of their unique experiences on something unexplainable or unbelievable. K.S. Raju, chairman of the Nagarjuna Group, was the first to get up and share his unique experience.</p>
<p>When KS speaks, he seems to fall into a trance; each word that comes from him strikes directly at the heart of the listeners. There was silence.</p>
<p>‘I am an entrepreneur and I manage a small group of enterprises called Nagarjuna, in India,’ KS began. ‘Due to some policy interpretation, a senior bureaucrat withheld a huge amount of money and my every argument with him went unheard. Even before hearing me out, he would look at his watch, making it evident that he was waiting for the allotted time to be over. It was quite a painful experience and I gave vent to my frustrations in private.Then something strange happened.’ He paused – a long pause.Then KS turned and looked at his daughter.</p>
<p>‘One fine morning, Laxmi, my daughter, made me realise that what I was doing was not my natural way. She explained that, maybe, the bureaucrat was carrying out his <em>dharma</em>, the duty allotted to him! Why should I feel bad about him if my logic didn’t appeal to him? Both of us were looking at the same issue from different perspectives.’ KS turned to the panel of experts and looked directly into their eyes. He was absolutely calm and the people were eager to hear more from him.</p>
<p>‘Then a miracle happened!’ KS started after a brief pause. ‘The awareness created by my daughter brought me back to my senses. I started loving the bureaucrat and hugging him in my imagination. In my prayers I prayed for his well-being. I filled pure love for him in my heart. And when the time came for the next meeting after a month, I greeted him with pure warmth and, at first he looked into my eyes and made some personal inquiries that were really soothing to me. Then he patiently heard my viewpoint without looking at his watch this time. I took more time than was allotted. After hearing me fully, he said, ’Mr Raju, it makes a lot of sense to me. I will send my team to review the matter and let me then see what I can do to resolve it.’ When the meeting was over, he got up and came to the door and shook my hand with unprecedented warmth. The matter was soon resolved.</p>
<p>‘Hug the guy in your imagination if you want to create a pure relationship without any selfish motives. Generate positive vibrations to drive out negativity,’ he concluded, and people began to get up spontaneously to give him a standing ovation.</p>
<p>Jesus Christ said: ‘If someone strikes you on one cheek, turn to him the other also. ‘Buddha’s thoughts are no</p>
<p>different when he says, ’Negativity cannot be countered with negative thoughts.’ The Holy Qur’an says, “Repel the evil of another with your good deeds. You will see that the one with whom you had enmity will be your close friend.” (Qur’an 41:34) According to Hindu philosophy, ‘Good (positive) deeds produce good results and bad (negative) deeds produce bad results.’ So, be positive in thoughts and actions and, for sure, the results will be positive. All scriptures say this. We read them but do not trust our own scriptures.</p>
<p>The power of a pure relationship is immeasurable. Just hug in your imagination and you will find the bonds of relationships getting strengthened. The only way to drive away the negative waves is by creating positive waves of thoughts. Hug even your enemy in your imagination and you will find foes turning into friends.</p>
<p>You cannot hug in your imagination without loving someone, without having good feelings for someone. It is such a powerful process! I have learnt the art of living and developing pure relationships – managing from within!</p>
<p>Relationships are nurtured by taking care of others. When you do so, you are already taken care of by the unseen.</p>
<p>This is what Ralph Waldo Emerson meant by his famous words: ‘It is one of the most beautiful compensations of life that no man can sincerely try to help another without helping himself.’</p>
<p>
<em>Hug your enemies in your imagination and turn them into your friends </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Great people stay frozen in space and time </strong>
</p>
<p><span><sub>“</sub></span>Dear Professor</p>
<p>…I am very happy to learn that you will also be meeting with Dr. Vivian! He is one of our most ‘unconventional’ politicians in Singapore. I have been his fan all along; although I have yet to meet him in person. Before he joined the political arena, he was one of the most prominent personalities that constantly spoke up with the aim of helping to build a better Singapore. I am sure you will have a good meeting with him. I can already see the sparks flying from the meeting of two brilliant minds!...”</p>
<p>I read this mail again and again. I felt shy reading the last sentence, though I felt happy form within. ‘Praise’ if taken with humility always soothes the soul. </p>
<p>It was a mail from my friend Lawrence of SQC,</p>
<p>Singapore. This email was in response to my sharing with him about my proposed meeting with Dr. Vivian Balakrishanan, the then Minister of State for National Development and the Chairman for ‘RSC’ – Remaking Singapore Committee. </p>
<p>The purpose of this meeting was to get some genuine understanding on the ‘Remaking of Singapore’ story, for my book, “The Soul Story of Singapore”.</p>
<p>It was Raheed Nargund, the then Regional Director of IE Singapore who took the ‘initiative’ and happen he did — the meeting. Raheed is known for his ‘finitiative’ behaviour – once he initiates a move he never stops till he finishes it. He is a very loving person with a genuine smile. It is no wonder people admire him for what he truly is – A humble being! He knew Dr. Vivian and on his request the young minister agreed to meet me, plunging all protocol, to share his thoughts for my ‘The Soul Story of Singapore’.</p>
<p>I reached Bukhara Restaurant along with my son Feroz, who was working with Raheed in IE Singapore. Raheed had also invited Anil Murthy, then the Senior Assistant Director, Arts and Heritage Division of MICA, who was in attendance</p>
<p>before the arrival of the minister. I had already met Anil earlier through Raheed in one of such ‘soul-discovering meetings’. He was a very young ‘Scholar’ who had carved his career in the civil services of Singapore. </p>
<p>The minister arrived without any fanfare — A young slim and smart person with mixed Indian and Chinese features; probably in his late thirties or early forties I guesstimated. With a bright face and small yet twinkling eyes, I found him most unassuming and informal person with zero frills. He came straight to the table and lunch was served without any formalities. The way ‘the big event’ was unfolding in such a simple manner was unconceivable to me. </p>
<p>I was wondering, if such could ever happen in my country? — A minister driving his own car, with no escorts, no paparazzi, no yes-sayers! In fact in India, used to be a fashion statement for anyone with a political attire to flaunt bodyguards but now it’s becoming a fetish rather than a security prerequisite. One of my mis-encounters with a politician was when during a flight from Delhi to Bangalore; I found my co-passenger a familiar face. He must be some popular figure as the airhostess of Indian Airlines, were</p>
<p>serving him with pasted smiles and bent knees. Then, the co-pilot swung by and started ‘siring’ him. I recalled having seen him on TV before but somehow could not place him. I didn’t like the frustrating feeling of not recalling who he was, but my curiosity got the better of me and I had to ask him.</p>
<p>He looked at me sheepishly and replied, that he was the Minister for Civil Aviation, Sharad Yadav. He was certainly not pleased with my lack of knowledge about his political stardom. Little did he know that this was only the establishment of my party-political ignorance? A few probing questions later about his political party gave way to my farreaching obliviousness, as he realised that I had mistaken him for his namesake — Sharad Mahajan a politician from a rival political party.</p>
<p>Back in Singapore, no ‘wasta’ was required to meet a vibrant personality like ‘Dr. Vivian’. After the pleasantries he began sharing his views. His tone was so polite that occasionally I had to bend forward to lend him an ear; my ears that were attuned to the high pitch of blaring horns I hear, back home were recalibrating to the humble low pitch of the minister. He would make conscious effort to look at</p>
<p>each of us sparingly, showing both importance and comfort. Let me try to restate his infinite passion through my finite vocabulary. </p>
<p>“Singapore had an accidental birth!” He took us back to the year 1819 and narrated the history of Singapore’s accidental discovery by Sir Stamford Raffles. It was a small deserted island without any resources. Like India, Singapore went through the British Raj for over 150 years. It also faced the darkest time during the Japanese occupation. Eventually liberation came for Singapore and Malaya, but the federal honeymoon didn’t last long. When Singapore was cast out by Malaya and became prematurely independent in 1965, the leaders cried rather than cheered. The idea that a small island city-state of two million people with no congenial neighbourhood could survive in what was then a difficult and troubled region seemed almost unreal. The odds were always against Singapore succeeding. Remarkably, it has survived beating the odds and grown up well. </p>
<p>Vivian was very modest not claiming Singapore as one of the most advanced nations of the world. Contrarily, he said, “Four decades’ time is too short for gaining maturity for any nation, especially in a multi-lingual, multi-racial, and</p>
<p>multi-religious society.” After a brief pause he added, “But I am very optimistic.” </p>
<p>He didn’t make any tall claims, nor did he underestimate the severity of the challenge before Singapore. But he was quite firm and optimistic to grow as a great nation. And grow it did, today we all recall Singapore Inc., with awe!</p>
<p>“We can neither undo our history, nor can we change our geography! It is a fact that Singapore is a very small piece of land”, he noted.</p>
<p>Singapore is one of the smallest and densely populated countries in the world. Nonetheless if you compare Singapore as a ‘city’ with other populous cities in the world, the picture suddenly emerges — advantage Singapore! Singapore is indeed a city-state. </p>
<p>“Though we couldn’t make the small island big, we have discovered the ways to create value beyond geography,” he said with a mild smile. Then he explained the FTA – Free Trade Agreement – policy of Singapore. Later, I learnt that within a brief time Singapore has already concluded FTAs with New Zealand, European Free Trade Association, Japan, Australia and United States and made good progress with</p>
<p>other countries, to name a few, China, India, Canada, Jordon, Korea, Mexico, Sri Lanka, besides the ASEAN countries. </p>
<p>“China, India and the US would make good progress and may probably lead the world economy for the next fifty years.” I gathered this from the views of Dr. Vivian. “These three countries make a good economic triangle,” added Anil. Both, Raheed and Anil were quite eloquent during the informal meeting with the minister.</p>
<p>“Yes, an economic triangle,” Vivian smiled and added, “Singapore could become the centre of this economic triangle.” Then he explained how Singapore was going to emerge as an economic hub in the Southeast Asia linking the East and the West.</p>
<p>“Creating a compassionate and gracious Singapore seems to be the sole objective of Remaking Singapore,” I purposely refocused the topic. “For my soul story of Singapore, I would like to know more about it.” After saying this I sought his permission to quote extracts from his report that he submitted to government as the Chairman of Remaking Singapore Committee. He smilingly permitted, granting a great relief to me. </p>
<p>I knew that the government’s endeavour is to rebuild Singapore by strengthening the value system through a ‘Beyond 5 Cs’ (Career; Credit Cards; Cars; Condos; Clubs) campaign. ‘The Remaking Singapore Committee’ has reached out to a wide cross-section of Singaporeans, especially the post-independent generation, to understand their aspirations and goals, as well as to explore new ideas, directions and plans. With the survival impetus clearly in mind, the Committee has arrived at ‘actionable outcomes’ – the outcomes that arise from a diversity of views offered by Singaporeans, for the benefit of Singaporeans. </p>
<p>Concluding, Dr. Vivian elucidated how they plan to remake Singapore enriching the values and keeping focus on intangibles alongside economical and technological developments.</p>
<p>I thought to myself, “Do countries like India envisage such value-based economy?” Instead, as we learn from the media that our legislators while away their time by watching illicit films on their mobile phones and iPads, during important deliberations that could potentially change the nation.</p>
<p>My meeting with the minister is but a fond memory</p>
<p>— the moments remained frozen in space, though the time was moving. “What a dragon!” I murmured. As the legend goes, only once Confucius had gone to meet Lao Tzu at his monastery and came back possessed with his intuitive thoughts so much so that he called Lao Tzu a dragon that could climb the clouds. It was the central intelligence that released a bit from its reservoir and the world of knowledge was filled with noble thoughts on virtue and wisdom. </p>
<p>
<em>I had met the Confucius dragon! </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Be a melody-maker ; create melody in life. </strong>
</p>
<p>o company has ever born cash rich unless</p>
<p>either the founder has pumped in borrowed money or inherited a fortune. I floated my consulting company, ‘Intellects Biz’ in the year 2004. After having conducted six workshops I was still toiling with the teething problems of its infancy, which was a natural phenomenon. Those were the days when ‘Intellects Biz’ had little identity so much so that many a time I used to feel shy in introducing myself as the managing director of a company unknown to Corporate India. The only point that kept my morale high was feedback from the participants. Many of my training workshops used to conclude with delegates giving a ‘Standing Ovation’ in recognition of my efforts and unique methodology.</p>
<p>One company that had been participating diligently in most of my workshops was BASIX – a value-based company dealing with micro financing. One day I received a call from Vijay Mahajan, the Chairman and Managing Director of BASIX. He wanted to meet me. He proposed that either he</p>
<p>would come to my office or I go to his office to meet him. On two occasions that we agreed to meet the meeting didn’t take place. The third time, I could make it. Since he didn’t mention the purpose of meeting, I was expecting a business meeting for some consultancy assignment.</p>
<p>When I reached BAXIS’s corporate office, the receptionist welcomed me, by leaving her chair and ushered me to the Chairman’s chamber, making me feel, like an important visitor.</p>
<p>I entered the room and Vijay Mahajan welcomed me by getting up from his chair – a good gesture. Then something strange happened. He started looking at me, from top to toe, and in second glance, from toe to top! I felt a bit embarrassed. I asked him what made him to look at me that way. He coolly told me, “Let me see you, Professor Siddiqui, wholesomely!” After a while he offered the chair and requested me to be comfortable. Then he asked my choice, which, as usual, went in favour of coffee.</p>
<p>While sipping my coffee I asked him what made him to look at me that way. And his reply was most inspiring to me. He said, “In each of your workshops I have sponsored a batch of six managers. After they come back from your workshop I met each of them. Do you know what happened?” I didn’t know so I just smiled. “When they come to me from your workshop, they forget to walk – they only fly.” He paused and looked at me. I didn’t know whether it was a contempt or compliment! After a long pause he said,</p>
<p>“When this happened to my sixth batch of managers, I decided to meet the guru who has the magic power to inspire my people to the extent that they fly up, up and away and never look down, or look back.” It was an emotional punch</p>
<p>— my eyes swelled with tears, as I was not mentally prepared to receive such a great compliment from a great man, who received many national awards and recognitions.</p>
<p>“The core purpose of this meeting was,” coolly mentioned Vijay Mahajan, “to meet the person, who is capable to play miracles.” The meeting was over with some informal chat. To me, it was a great <em>moment of truth</em>!</p>
<p>Now that my company has grown and became eight years old, there is not a single workshop in which the delegates from BASIX have not participated. Once there was a calendar clash and the VP-HR had to cancel the nominations as the quarterly business review meeting was scheduled on the same dates. But, when Vijay Mahajan came to know about it, he asked his HR chief not to cancel the nominations and, rather, change the dates of the business review meeting. It was a unique experience and another great <em>moment of truth for us at Intellects Biz</em>.</p>
<p>I have yet to see a Pied Piper like Vijay Mahajan who always creates Moments of Magic for others. He loves his people and people love him.</p>
<p>
<em>People become great not by chance </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>I spoke to my heart. “They are unlimited </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>and therefore they become great! </em>
</p>
<p>have known Singareni Collieries Company</p>
<p>Limited (SCCL) from my Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML) days, when SCCL was one our prestigious clients and I Director, HR in BEML. Having served in a public sector myself, I knew SCCL was one of the toughest mining companies to work for. Time elapsed and I moved on to work for many other organizations until I floated my own consulting company ‘Intellects Biz’. It was then that SCCL invited me to seek my assistance for conducting workshops at their different mining complexes, in India.</p>
<p>My meeting with Mr RH Khwaja was rather accidental.</p>
<p>I received a call from, the then Group General Manager (HR), Chandrakant Sharma, asking me to conduct a retreat for SCCL employees that would include their Chairman,</p>
<p>Directors and other senior management team member. He insisted that I keep the ‘Balanced Scorecard’ as the central theme of my training session. Upon learning that his CEO was an IAS (Indian Administrative Service) officer, I tried eluding the offer to take on this assignment. Officialdom and I do not go together. Even as the Director (HR) of a public sector company I could never establish heart-to-heart relationship with my administrative bosses – the bureaucrats.</p>
<p>Chandrakanth was persistent and convinced me thus; He said, “<em>Mr. Siddiqui, I have already scored with my CEO, Mr. Khwaja that you have agreed to undertake this assignment. Upon my assertion all activities have already been arranged</em>”. He stressed, “<em>Should I fail to deliver my commitment, it is likely I shall lose my job</em>.” Call it emotional black mail, but I succumbed to it, leaving me with an inexplicable urge to meet his boss in flesh, who was so tough as a rock.</p>
<p>Since the time I first met Mr. RH Khwaja at the resort</p>
<p>– the venue of our retreat, he remained on my mental scanner. After assessing him through the day’s interaction I formed my opinion that though externally, he seemed to be</p>
<p>tough, his underlying core was soft. I found his persona to be impressively disciplined and peppered with great unpretentiousness. I concluded, that he was hard like a coconut shell on the outside and soft as its kennel from the inside.</p>
<p>After having met Khwaja saab (as I fondly call him), on several occasions, I found a great mentor in him; with a laser sharp focus on achieving results and a memory that precedes him, he took SCCL by the horn, to grander heights. I was humbled by his unequivocal credit to his predecessor APVN Sarma calling him ‘a bold and visionary leader’. I overheard him at times, giving a lion’s share of the success, to his teammates, who contributed to the success of the turnaround.</p>
<p>Having been in the eye of several turnarounds myself, I unearthed that this mining company was not only different; with its hard to reach project terrain but also difficult with its Naxalite insurgency issues. For most modern day corporate leaders, cultivating the trade unions and managing harmonious industrial relations with workers is nirvana. But try taming the Naxals who use weapons instead of pens and blood instead of ink, and negotiate over dead bodies to be.</p>
<p>In ‘The Singareni Love Story’ — the sequel to ‘The Acrobatics of Change’ — Khwaja saab narrates the adversities, fragilities and the challenges he overcame in bringing about not just a successful turnaround but a profitable one too. He goes on to explain that while for others it might be a turnaround, to him it was a romance with nature and the ‘Singarenians’, whom he bonded through his simple yet powerful mantra: “One Family; One Vision; One Mission’!</p>
<p>There are two cores of personality – inner core and outer core. Some people appear soft externally but their heart is hard as stone. They have no concern for their people and extend little or no support. They fake smiles and pretend to be very kind and humble only to get the job at hand accomplished on time and within budget – They score well with their bosses! While there are others who appear to be hard and tough, but are very supportive and kind-hearted. They are very humane to their team members and people still like them being tough on them — They score well with their subordinates! The later is akin to a coconut – externally hard, internally soft. On Mouton and Blake’s grid they are known as 9:9 leaders – extremely demanding; extremely supporting. RH Khwaja the Union Secretary, Ministry of</p>
<p>Tourism, belongs to this extraordinary category of ‘level 5 leadership’ — highly disciplined and tough, yet humble, kind and supportive to him team.</p>
<p>
<em>Be hard and tough externally</em>
<em>; </em>
<em>be soft and kind internally</em>
<em>. </em>
<em>Be highly disciplined</em>
<em>, </em>
<em>yet caring and supportin</em>
<em>g </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>The significance of man is in what he longs to attain </strong>
</p>
<p>e use the words ‘Trust’ and ‘Credibility’ as two sides of a coin that always go along together. While at times trust brings credibility there are occasions when credibility results in trust. Though they are both offspring of ‘faith yet, there is a stark difference between ‘Trust’ and ‘Credibility’. </p>
<p>‘Trust begets trust’ – the keyword here being begotten</p>
<dl>
<dt>—</dt>
<dd> from YOU! As you have direct control on Trust – you can give trust and likely have it in return. While you could choose to trust someone, or not, you really don’t have any direct say on your own credibility – others do. You may make efforts to earn trust but it doesn’t warrant credibility. That seal of credibility remains in others’ hands. So simply said </dd>
<dt>—</dt>
<dd> it is merely though continuous trust that you can foster (not enforce) credibility. </dd>
</dl>
<p>The India Tourism Development Corporation Limited</p>
<p>(ITDC) is a Hospitality, retail and Education company owned by Government of India, under the Ministry of Tourism. Established in 1966, it owns over 17 properties under the brand —Ashok Group of Hotels, across India. When Dr Lalit K Panwar (IAS), the Chairman and Managing Director of ITDC invited me to conduct a workshop in Hotel Ashok, New Delhi on the theme, “Moments of Truth” (MoT), I though to myself how I could show light to the very beacon in the hospitality industry. However, seeing the team of directors and senior managers in my audience boosted my morale. By the end of my three-day mentoring session it dawned on me that Dr Panwar had been present all through the sessions – an uncommon feat of protocol feigning chairmen and MDs of corporate India.</p>
<p>Well, I finished the session to a resounding applause and my moment of truth emanated from the delightful feedback the participants showered on me. The best of which came from Dr Panwar, who rivaled the performance of this MoT workshop with ‘Sholay’, the Bollywood blockbuster film of the 1970s. Besides that his pleasing remark fleetingly lent me a feeling like I was ‘Vijay’ the hero (Amitabh Bachan), this unique compliment warmed my heart.</p>
<p>Later, Dr Panwar shared that guests, especially foreigners, give good feedback about the <em>genuine</em> smile of staff at hotel</p>
<p>Ashok. Agreeing, I added that Dalai Lama’s concept of ‘genuine smile’, emanates only when there is some basis to smile. Dr Panwar nodded and said he explains to the foreigners that even though India is a country of various religions we all believe in the Indian tradition where guests are considered as the blessings of God!” I smiled to myself thinking that His Holiness would be thrilled to hear the basis of the smiles at Hotel Ashok.</p>
<p>When you build a green pasture in your heart, the lovebirds recurrently visit. No wonder a government owned hotel managed by ITDC, under the leadership of Dr Lalit K Panwar – a very humble and charming person – earned its credibility in the hospitality industry for they look within, sans aping the West. They take the <em>kernel</em> – the spirit — from the inherited Indian values, without the shallow and superficial show-off!</p>
<p>Motivated with the feedback of my performance I was requested to replicate the philosophy of Moments of Truth to all the general managers of Ashok group. The repeat workshop was held in hotel Jaipur Ashok, the following month. Dr Lalitkumar Panwar once again participated and remained seated along with his team – the <em>creme de la creme </em>of the Indian hospitality industry. Yet again I was faced with</p>
<p>-Teach fish how to swim - dilemma. Alhamdulillah! The</p>
<p>workshop went well with excellent feedback from the participants.</p>
<p>On the following day I used my spare time to go for some sightseeing and shopping, before catching my late evening flight back home. One of the managers at hotel Ashok proudly volunteered to show me around Jaipur. In one of the handicraft emporiums after I had made my selection, my guide tried to bargain for me and was rewarded with a 10% discount by the shop owner. As we were walking out, my guide sparingly mentioned to the owner that I was the special guest of Dr Lalitkumar Panwar. </p>
<p>What followed was most amazing! To my great surprise, the owner left his chair and greeted me with greater warmth. He queried my guide, “Why didn’t you mention this to me earlier? The guest of Panwar Saheb is the guest of honour for me”. Mystified I probed further only to learn that Dr Panwar had done so much for Jaipur as a noble administrator that none could ever forget him. Actually, Dr Panwar had served Rajasthan in many capacities, including Principal Secretary and Secretary Tourism, and made such a wonderful contribution that the people of Rajasthan were indebted to him. No wonder that even a common shopkeeper had so much reverence for him.</p>
<p>The climax came when the owner of the emporium took the bill from my hands and tore it, as he asked the cashier to prepare another bill offering me 30% discount instead. I was humbled and accepted the discount but not before I pondered upon the credibility of the noble soul! — Just by being his <em>Atithi</em> I had derived so much reverence from a stranger – What an incredible credibility of Dr Panwar indeed!</p>
<p>
<em>Great are the people, who leav</em>
<em>e </em>
<em>their footprints on the sands of tim</em>
<em>e </em>
<em>after they are gone</em>
<em>. </em>
<em>Grander are those, whose footprint</em>
<em>s </em>
<em>stay frozen during their lifetime</em>
<em>! </em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Let Yang triumph; Let Yin manifest </strong>
</p>
<p>hen Steve Jobs the innovative co-founder of Apple who transformed the personal use of technology (as well as entire industries) with products such as the iPod, iPad, iPhone, the Macintosh computer and the iTunes music store, succumbed to cancer on 5<span><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-">th<\/a><\/sup></span> October 2011, his critics predicted that Apple was doomed, that it would die too sooner than later. Less than six months later with the launch of the new iPad on 16 March 2011, its stock more than doubled to cross for the first time; the US$600 per share mark. This makes Apple the world’s most valuable company, with a market capitalisation of nearly US$555 billion.</p>
<p>Apple Inc is clearly the “Most Admired,” the “Most Innovative,” and the “Master of Design. So what is their iSuccess?</p>
<p>During an interview when the late Steve Jobs was asked if Apple did any market research before developing it next</p>
<p>best iProduct? He replied, “We do no market research. It’s not about pop culture, and it’s not about fooling people, and it’s not about convincing people that they want something they don’t. We figure out what we want. And I think we’re pretty good at having the right discipline to think through whether a lot of other people are going to want it, too. That’s what we get paid to do. So you can’t go out and ask people, do you know, what’s the next big thing?”</p>
<p>Case in point, back then they figured they all hated those unfriendly Finnish cell phones, next thing we know we have a new product called the iPhone. Then came the iPad mocked by many only to be silenced by the brand new product category that it developed. Today the entire industry is building their versions of iPad, to grab a share of that market created by Apple – rest is history!</p>
<p>Then there is this great quote by Henry Ford, when he said, ‘If I’d have asked my customers what they wanted, they would have told me ‘A faster horse.”</p>
<p>So why does Apple the world’s most innovative company scoff at the notion of target markets, and they don’t believe in conducting focus groups or surveys? What is it that companies like Ford can see, which others find opaque? What is so different in such companies’ vision?</p>
<p>Well, it all starts with the leadership. Management gurus</p>
<p>describe leadership in terms of ‘Transactional Leaders’ and ‘Transformational Leaders’. The latter are visionary leaders, who see the future through their mental eye and transform the organization and prepare the people to match the changes they envision.</p>
<p>To my mind, there are two types of leaders – Those who follow the ‘Crystal ball’ and those who follow their ‘value or moral compass’. While some are good in understanding the future trends and develop their people and products towards that externally driven goal, there are others who develop people and build the organizations such that they are ever ready for the future trends. Such are companies that last long and stay anchored in space and time.</p>
<p>Those who follow vision along with values learn that the vision illuminates the direction and the values disclose whether the path chosen is righteous! Such leaders are but the Management Monks. The corporate world has grown rich only with the reserves of such exceptional leaders who are in minority yet restrain the world and mankind from going astray, for they use their moral compass at all times.</p>
<p>In todays corporate world the primary objective of any company is to gain the competitive-edge. This ‘mantra’ is taught in IIMs, MIT and Harvard Business Schools of the world. But Lao Tzu – the Old Master – said more than 2500 years ago:</p>
<p>
<em>“Those who do not compete do not meet competition!” </em>
</p>
<p>He queries, “Why is the sea king of a hundred stream?” and gives the solution, “for it lies below them!” Lao Tzu further says; “…the <em>humble</em> is the root of the <em>noble</em>; The <em>Low</em> is the foundation of <em>High</em>.”</p>
<p>On the other hand the old master warns us saying:</p>
<p>
<em>Too much success is not an advantage</em>
<em>. </em>
<em>Do not tinkle like jad</em>
<em>e </em>
<em>Or clatter like stone chimes</em>
<em>. </em>
</p>
<p>Then Tao Te Ching expands:</p>
<p>
<em>Better stop short than fill to the brim</em>
<em>. </em>
<em>Over sharpen the blade, and the edge will soon blunt</em>
<em>. </em>
<em>Amass a store of gold and jade, and no one can protect it</em>
<em>. </em>
<em>Claim wealth and titles, and disaster will soon follow</em>
<em>. </em>
<em>Retire when the work is done</em>
<em>. </em>
<em>This is the way to heaven</em>
<em>. </em>
</p>
<p>The learning from these pearls of wisdom is clear; Today, we do not need <em>management gurus</em>, to teach you, <em>How to sell the comb to the bald, or ashes to the devil or ice to the Eskimos!</em></p>
<p> We don’t need them any more. Today, we need the</p>
<p><em>management monks</em> who will use their moral compass, not the crystal ball, to impart wisdom and vision so that we can choose the right path.</p>
<p>Thick dark clouds are hovering over the world, today. Don’t be frightened, for from this darkness shall appear the glow-worms. Don’t be afraid of chaos; use your moral compass to show you the path to success.</p>
<p>
<em>When the country is confused and in chaos, loyal ministers appear </em>
</p>
<p>– Lao Tzu</p>
</body>
</html>
