<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>Prism Books</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body>
<HR>
<ul>
<li>
<A>prelims-Final 17-04-2013
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Text
</A>
</li>
</ul>
</HR>
<section class="level2 numbered" id="id-.">
<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">BHARATANATYAM</h2>
<h3>
<SPAN class="en">Thankamani Kutty </span>
</h3>
<h4>Published by : Prism Books Pvt. Ltd. </h4>
<p># 1865, 32<span><sup>nd </Sup></span>Cross, 10<span><Sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-">th <\/a><\/sup></span>Main, BSK II Stage Bengaluru -560 070. Phone: 080-26714108 Telefax : 080-26713979, e-mail : info@prismbooks.com</p>
<p>
<em>Also at </em>
</p>
<p>Chennai : Tel: 044-24311244, e-mail: prismchennai@prismbooks.com Hyderabad : Tel: 040-23261828, e-mail: prismhyderabad@prismbooks.com Kochi : Tel: 0484-4000945, e-mail: prismkochi@prismbooks.com Kolkata : Tel: 033-24297957, e-mail: prismkolkata@prismbooks.com</p>
<h4>© Prism Books Pvt. Ltd., 2011 </h4>
<p>Reprint : 2018, 2016, 2014, 2013</p>
<p>Pages : 52</p>
<p>Price : `100</p>
<p>Printed on : 70 gsm Maplitho</p>
<p>No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. ISBN : 978-81-7286-593-1</p>
<p>Printed at : Adithya Printers, Bengaluru</p>
<p>prelims-Final 20-01-2010.pmd 2 2/20/2014, 4:00 PM</p>
</section>
<section class="level2 numbered" id="id-.">
<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">I dedicate this book affectionately to my daughter Late Smt. Uma Venkitt</h2>
<p>Thankamani Kutty</p>
<p>prelims-Final 20-01-2010.pmd 3 4/17/2013, 4:00 PM</p>
<p>
<em>WHY THIS BOOK....</em>
<em>. </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>SMT. THANKAMANI KUTTY, wonderful both as an artiste and a teacher of Bharatanatyam and Mohiniattam, has planned this book for the young ones who want to take their first steps in the exquisite dance form, Bharatanatyam which has no parallel in this country. I know of no other person who is better equipped than her for this job. She knows the form inside out, and she is as expressive on stage, in bringing out the unchanted sources of grace and majesty of it, as she is before her students who are electrified by her distinctive style of teaching. </em>
</p>
<p><em>Indian dance, in all its classical and regional varieties, is now a part of world culture, and is being accepted far beyond the national boundaries of the country, not only by immigrant Indians, but also by people of land who have little knowledge of, or exposure to, Indian culture. This shows that dance, along with music, is the most universal art form and can break the cultural barriers more easily than the rest. I therefore think it an excellent idea to write a simple manual in English, in which short, easy steps are shown towards achieving a credible command on these dance forms. Dance of course is more of a </em>‘‘<em>Gurumukhi Vidya</em>’’<em>(Guru-dependant discipline) than any other such arts, but oral tradition has long since been replaced by literate and lately, printed tradition and one must take all the advantages available in the form of media for communicating to a wider audience. A book on dance, particularly an intricate dance form like Bharatanatyam, does not lead to the mastery of the form automatically, nor does anyone harbour any illusion about that. But a book such as this is still a big help and saver of time and effort, as it provides access to information that can be used and absorbed even when one is not practising. </em></p>
<p>
<em>Smt. Kutty has done a fine job in writing this book. Her presentation is lucid and business like and I am sure young aspirants in Bharatanatyam will benefit immensely by making this book their constant companion. </em>
</p>
<p>PABITRA SARKAR</p>
<p>Vice Chancellor, Rabindra Bharati University</p>
<p>prelims-Final 20-01-2010.pmd 4 4/17/2013, 4:00 PM</p>
<h3>CONTENTS </h3>
<p>FOREWORD INTRODUCTION 1 HASTA MUDRÂS (HAND GESTURES)</p>
<p>– Nritta, Asamyuta, Samyuta Hastâs -Definitions 2</p>
<p>– Nritta Hastâs, Asamyuta hastâs and Samyuta hastâs -Usage Different Orientations of the Palm -in hand gestures 22 Tatti Kumbidal -Stamping & Salutation, 22 and Ranga Adhidevata Stuti Ganesha Stotram 23 PÂDA BHEDA (Position of the feet) & Mandalas 24 Pushpânjali, Word meanings to Slokam (Ângikam Bhuvanam) and Ranga Adhidevata Stuti 32 Word meanings to ‘Pushpânjali’ 33 Major Limbs and Minor Limbs, Adavus : Basic Dance Steps (Karanâs) 34 Tattadavu & Nâttadavu 35 Pakka Adavu & Tattimettu Adavu 37 Tirmâna Adavu 37 Sarikkal Adavu 39 Tatti Kudichu Adavu 39 Kudichu Mettu Adavu & Tatti Nâtta Adavu 38 Poiccal Adavu & Korvai Adavu 40 Kudichu Tatta Adavu 40 Mandi Adavu 41 Sutral Adavu 42</p>
<p>
<span>prelims-Final 20-01-2010.pmd 5 4/17/2013, 4:00 PM </span>
<span>prelims-Final 20-01-2010.pmd 6 4/17/2013, 4:00 PM </span>
</p>
<p>FOREWORD</p>
<p>
<em>At no stage in the history of mankind have people universally taken so much of interest in the classical dances. </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>Long strides have been taken in every field of human endeavour, so it is but natural that these disciplines should also reflect the age. A standardised and systematic approach towards understanding these disciplines, is essential for further improvement. </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>In my long experience as a teacher of the dance form of Bharatanatyam. I have not known of any attempt having made so far, to standardise a syllabus for beginners, ensuring discipline, which is an indispensable part of learing, the basics of the said art form. </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>I have also realized that it is not enough for the teacher alone to know what is to be taught to the pupils at different levels. The teaching and learning process combine to create a common sharing ground of knowledge for teachers and pupils alike, when the pupils are made aware of the programme that the teacher intends to follow, in advance. This goes a long way towards creating a good teacher-student relationship. </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>I have written this book, based on the carefully formulated course of teaching that I have followed and have mainly adhered to ‘Bharata’s Natya Sastra’, Nandikeswara’s ‘Abhinaya Darpana’ and other books that I have used as reference. </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>My aim has been , to guide a sincere enthusiast of Bharatanatyam through the very basics of the form and thus to prepare him/her for the advanced stage of learning. </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>I also hope that my endeavour to systematize the general education of our classical arts would be beneficial to all the aspirants of Bharatanatyam and to the lovers of this art form. I aspire to bring about the basic schooling of Bharatanatyam, so that the outcome of the much devoted and painstaking practice does not go wasted. </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>I greatly acknowledge the encouragement received from Respected Sri Pabitra Sarkar, the Vice-Chancellor of Rabindra Bharati University, Calcutta. </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>Thankamani Kutty </em>
</p>
<p>
<span>prelims-Final 20-01-2010.pmd 7 4/17/2013, 4:00 PM </span>
<span>prelims-Final 20-01-2010.pmd 8 4/17/2013, 4:00 PM </span>
</p>
</section>
</section>
<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-">
<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">BHARATANÂTYAM</h1>
</section>
<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-">
<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">BHAVA RAGA TALA NATYAM</h1>
<p>BHARATANÂTYAM</p>
<p>A dance style truly Indian & devotional in character which evolved from its ritualistic roots through the ages to its present highly developed fine art form. It owes its existence to royal patronage and the devadasis who practised and preserved it, aiming spiritual identification. Closely adhering to ‘Bharata’s Nâtya Sâstra’, a comprehensive compilation of the then prevailing dance, drama & music between 4th Century and 1st Century B.C. and Nandikeswara’s ‘Abhinaya Darpanâ’, the name ‘Bharatanâtyam’ itself is about 200 years old and may have been compounded from the three syllables BHÂ (Bhâva or Emotion), RÂ (Râga or Melody), and TÂ (Tâla or Rhythm) and ‘NÂTYAM’ Or Drama.</p>
<p>IMPORTANCE OF HAND GESTURES</p>
<p>The art of hand gestures is so vast that it covers all the aspects of human life and the universe. They are capable of expressing a number of things, including abstract concepts like beauty and truth. The hands become the vehicle of ‘dance-speech’ and can translate song words into sign words. The language of hand guestures enables the dancer to express practically anything. It augments the communication, enhances the impact of Abhinaya and endows it with poetry. The hands have life-Hastaprâna and invest the classical dance form with an enchanting quality.</p>
<p>Nritta Hastâs are decorative hand gestures. It is used to enhance the beauty of the dance.</p>
<p>HASTA MUDRÂS</p>
<p>One of the striking features of the Indian Classical dances is the use of the hand gestures of ‘Hasta Mudrâs’. The hand gestures are taken from the two most authentic dance text books -Nâtya Shâstra & Abhinaya Darpanâ. Hastâs are classified into three categories - NRITTA (pure dance), ASAMYUTA (Single) and SAMYUTA (double) hastâs.</p>
<table>
<tr>
<th>NRITTA HASTÂS </th>
<th>: </th>
<th>When a single hand or both hands are used purely for </th>
</tr>
<tr>
<TH/>
<TD/>
<td>decorative effect and without intending to convey any </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<TH/>
<TD/>
<td>meaning, they are called Nritta Hastâs. </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>ASAMYUTA HASTÂS </th>
<td>: </td>
<td>When a single hand is used as a codified gesture, it is known </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<TH/>
<TD/>
<td>as an Asamyuta Hasta. </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>SAMYUTA </th>
<td>HASTÂS </td>
<td>: </td>
<td>When both hands are used in combination, they make a </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<TH/>
<TD/>
<td>Samyuta hasta. </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>NRITTA HASTÂS </th>
<td>: </td>
<td>In pure dance movements thirteen hand gestures are mostly </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<TH/>
<TD/>
<td>used. </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>(See the enclosed </th>
<TD/>
<td>They are as follows : </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>pictures) </th>
<TD/>
<td>PATÂKÂ, TRIPATÂKÂ, KARTARI MUKHA, KATAKÂ MUKHA, ALAPADMA, </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<TH/>
<TD/>
<td>MUSHTI, SHIKHARA, SUCHI, TÂMRACHUDA, KAPITTHA, MRIGA </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<TH/>
<TD/>
<td>SHIRSHA, SWASTIKA AND AVAHITHA. </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<TH/>
<TD/>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>SOME OF THE NRITTA HASTÂS</p>
<p>3</p>
<p>ASAMYUTA HASTÂS : See the enclosed pictures. By holding the same hand gestures in Single hand gestures different ways, one can denote numerous meanings. A few usages of the Asamyuta Hastâs are given below :</p>
<ol>
<li>PATÂKÂ (Flag) : One’s own self, Yourself, could waves, path, cut, forbidding things, addressing, silence, king, hide, night, benediction, opening & closing of door. praise etc. </li>
<li>TRIPATÂKÂ : Crown, tree, arrow, sun, decorations drawn on the face, fire, vajra (thunderbolt & lightning). </li>
<li>ARDHA PATÂKÂ (Half Flag) : Leaves, two or both, horn, banks of the river, tower, etc. </li>
<li>KARTARI MUKHA (Scissor Face) : Separation, corner of the eye, lightning, falling, etc. </li>
<li>MAYURA (Peacock) : Peacock, vomiting, wiping away tears, ornamental mark on the forehead, creepers, etc. </li>
<li>ARDHA CHANDRA (Half Moon) : Phase of the moon, strangling, mirror, ear of an elephant, waist, etc. </li>
</ol>
<p>4</p>
<p>ASAMYUTA HASTÂS</p>
<p>PATÂKA TRIPATÂKA ARDHA PATÂKA</p>
<p>KARTARI MUKHA MAYURA ARDHA CHANDRA</p>
<p>5</p>
<ol>
<li>ARÂLA (Bent) : Features of a peacock, pond, sipping water in religious ceremonies, strong wind, etc. </li>
<li>SHUKATUNDA (Parrot’s Beak) : Anger, shooting of an arrow, to show a narrow line, etc. </li>
<li>MUSHTI (Fist) : Firmness, grasping, power, wrestler, anger, holding any object, etc. </li>
<li>SHIKHARA (Peak) : Bow, Pillar, Pouring something, embrace, bell, questioning, husband, hero, etc. </li>
<li>KAPITTHA (Name of Fruit) : Laxmi (Goddess of fortune), milking cows, parrot’s beak, offering flowers, churning, holding an arrow, pulling, offering light or incense, etc. </li>
<li>KATAKÂ MUKHA (Opening in a Bracelet): Drawing of a bow slowly, offering flowers, pearls and precious stones, eating delicious food, breaking a twig, etc. </li>
</ol>
<p>6</p>
<p>ARÂLA SHUKATUNDA MUSHTI</p>
<p>KAPITTHA KATAKÂ MUKHA</p>
<p>7</p>
<ol>
<li>SUCHI (Needle) : World, rod, that, thin, one hundred, beating the drum, nose, threatening, astonishment, Parabrahma (the Supreme soul), etc. </li>
<li>CHANDRA KALÂ (Digit of the Moon) : Crescent moon, face, the crown of Lord Shiva, etc. </li>
<li>PADMAKOSHA (Lotus Bud) : Fruit, flowers, cluster of buds, etc. </li>
<li>SARPA SHIRSHA (Snake Head) : Snake, offering water to the Gods, occepting, giving, drinking, slapping on the arms like wrestlers, etc. </li>
<li>MRIGASHIRSHA (Deer Head) : Women, animals, house, cheek, staircase, applying three lines of sandal paste across the forehead, etc. </li>
<li>SIMHA MUKHA (Lion Face) : Deer, hare, lion, grass, fragrance, etc. </li>
</ol>
<p>8</p>
<p>ASAMYUTA HASTÂS</p>
<p>SUCHI CHANDRA KALÂ PADMAKOSHA</p>
<p>MRIGASHIRSHA <span><sub>9</sub></span>SIMHA MUKHA</p>
<ol>
<li>LÂNGULA OR KÂNGULA (Tail) : Little bells, grapes, water lily, etc. </li>
<li>ALAPADMA (Full Blown Lotus) : Full moon, lotus, happiness, questioning, ball, beautiful, face, chignon, etc. </li>
</ol>
<p>21 CHATURA (Square) : Eyes, requesting, touching the God’s feet, etc.</p>
<p>22 BHRAMARA (Bee) : Bee, parrot and similar birds, untying the garment, dark colour, etc.</p>
<ol>
<li>HAMSÂSYA (Swan Face) : String of pearls, jasmine gard, drawing, listening, typing, etc. </li>
<li>HAMSAPAKSHA (Swan Wing) : Number six, arranging things, playing veena, friend, etc. </li>
</ol>
<p>10</p>
<p>ASAMYUTA HASTÂS</p>
<p>LÂNGULA OR KÂNGULA</p>
<p>CHATURA</p>
<p>HAMSÂSYA</p>
<p>11</p>
<ol>
<li>SAMDAMSA (Compress) : Denotes number five, apprehension, offering, insect, sore, etc. </li>
<li>MUKULA (Bud) : Water lily, eating, the lotus bud, small, navel, etc. </li>
<li>TÂMRACHUDA (Red-Crested Cock) : Cock, crane, crow, etc. </li>
<li>TRISULA (Trident) : Number three, leaf of the ‘Bel’ (wood apple) tree, the idea of Trinity, trident, etc. </li>
</ol>
<p>12</p>
<p>ASAMYUTA HASTÂS</p>
<p>SAMDAMSA MUKULA TÂMRACHUDA</p>
<p>TRISULA VYÂGHRA</p>
<p>URNA NABHA</p>
<p>13</p>
<p>SAMYUTA HASTÂS : ( See the enclosed pictures ) Guestures for Combined hands.</p>
<ol>
<li>ANJALI (Salutation) : Two Pataka hands touch face to face against one another. It is used to express bowing, obedience, clapping time, salutation. When Anjali hands are held above the head it is the salutation for Gods, when held before the face, it is the salutation for gurus (teachers), when held on the chest, it is the salutation for friends. </li>
<li>KAPOTA (Pigeon) : The palms of the two hands are slightly hollowed and are joined at the sides and the top. It is used to express the taking of an oath, conversation with gurus and elders, respectful acceptance, plaintain flower etc. </li>
<li>KARKATA (Crab) : The fingers of the two hands are clasped between one another and the hands are kept with the knuckles facing outwards. It is used to indicate a crowd, a forest, bending the branch of a tree etc. </li>
<li>SVASTIKA (Crossed) : The two Pataka hands are crossed at the wrists, where the bases of the palms touch and the left hand is placed above the right. It is used to express dependence, showing closeness etc. </li>
<li>DOLA (Swing) : Two Pataka hands facing downwards in any position.It is used to express the beginning of the dance, fainting, creepers etc. </li>
<li>PUSHPAPUTA (Handful of Flowers) : Two Uttana Sarpa Shirsha hands combined on one side. It is used to express receiving and offering, drinking water etc. </li>
</ol>
<p>14</p>
<p>SAMYUTA HASTÂS</p>
<p>ANJALI KAPOTA</p>
<p>KARKATA SVASTIKA</p>
<p>DOLA PUSHPAPUTA</p>
<p>15</p>
<ol>
<li>UTSANGA (Embrace) : Two Unmukha Mriga Shirsha hands are crossed in front of the chest. It is used to denote embrace, modesty, bashfulness, opening a book etc. </li>
<li>SHIVALINGA (The Symbolic Representation of Lord Shiva) : The Uttana Ardha-Chandra with the left hand and the Unmukha Shikhara with the right hand placed on it. It is used to express the power of Lord Shiva. </li>
<li>KATAKÂ-VARDHANA (Link of Increase) : A Svastika is made by placing two Katakamukha hands of their wrists. It is used to express coronation, marriage blessing etc. </li>
<li>KARTARI-SVASTIKA (Crossed Scissors) : Two Kartari-Mukha hands are crossed at the wrists, with the palms facing outwards, the right hand over the left. It is used to express the branches of trees, the summit of a mountain etc. </li>
<li>SHAKATA (Cart) : From the Paranmukha Ardha-Chandra in front of the chest, the second, third and the little fingers are stretched straight and the index fingers are curved and bent in half touching the middle of the thumb. It is used to express gestures describing demons and Rakshsas, wheel of any car etc. </li>
<li>SANKHA (Conch) : The four fingers of the right hand are clasped around the left thumb and the tip of the right thumb touch the tips of the other fingers. It is used to express the blowing of the conch-shell at the time of worship, representing Lord Vishnu, welcoming etc. </li>
</ol>
<p>16</p>
<p>SAMYUTA HASTÂS</p>
<p>UTSANGA SHIVALINGA</p>
<p>KATAKA-VARDHANA KARTARI-SVASTIKA</p>
<p>SHAKATA SANKHA</p>
<p>17</p>
<ol>
<li>CHAKRA (Discuss) : Two Ardha-Chandra hands are held obliquely, palms touching. It is used to denote the chakra (wheel) of Lord Vishnu etc. </li>
<li>SAMPUTA (Covered Box) : Two Sarpa Shirsha hands covering each other obliquely. It is used to express hiding and concealing things etc. </li>
<li>PÂSHA (Cord) : From the Tâmra Chudo mudrâ the forefingers are bent and interlocked. It is used to express enmity, a chain, a noose etc. </li>
<li>KILAKA (Bond) : Two Mriga Shirsha hands facing in opposite directions with the extended litle fingers interlocked. It is used to express love, affection, fondness etc. </li>
<li>MATSYA (Fish) : The Patâkâ hands facing downwards one upon the other with thumbs extended. It is used to denote a fish. </li>
<li>KURMA (Tortoise) / (Teppapin) : From the Chakra hands, the hands are clasped together with three fingers bent, the thumb and the little fingers stretched. It is used to denote the tortoise / teppapin. </li>
</ol>
<p>18</p>
<p>SAMYUTA HASTÂS</p>
<p>CHAKRA SAMPUTA</p>
<p>PASHA KILAKA</p>
<p>MATSYA KURMA</p>
<p>19</p>
<ol>
<li>VARÂHA (Boar) : Two Mriga Shirsha hands are placed one upon the other, the thumbs and the little fingers are joined. It is used to denote a boar. </li>
<li>GARUDA (Bird of Mythology) : The Ardha Chandra hands are held obliquely with the four fingers stretched and the thumbs interlocked. It is used to express the flying of bird, also the Garuda bird, the sacred vehicle of Lord Vishnu. </li>
<li>NÂGA-BANDHA (Serpent-Tie) : Two Sarpa Shirsha hands are crossed. It is used to expresss pairs of hands, spells, coil of a snake etc. </li>
<li>KHATVA (Bedstead) : The Chatura hands are placed one upon the other and the forefingers are stretched. It is used to denote bedstead. </li>
<li>BHERUNDA (Mythological Bird with Two Heads) : The Kapittha hands are joined at the wrists. It is used to denote a pair of Bherunda birds. </li>
<li>AVAHITTHA (Eagerness) : The Alapadma-hands are held in front of the chest. It is used to denote interest, keenness, the symbol of breasts, erotic dances etc. </li>
</ol>
<p>20</p>
<p>SAMYUTA HASTÂS</p>
<p>VARAHA GARUDA</p>
<p>NAGA-BANDHA <span><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-">KHATVA <\/a><\/sup></span></p>
<p>BHERUNDA AVAHITTHA</p>
<p>21</p>
<p>The following are the different orientations of the palm used in the hand gestures :</p>
<p>UTTÂLODHASTHALA STIRYAK OORDHWODHOMUKHA EVACHA PANCHA PRACHÂRA HASTASYA NRITTA NÂTYA SAMÂSRAYA</p>
<p>Uttâla – Upwards Adha – downwards Sthala – surface Tiryak – towards oneself Oordhwa – facing up Adhomukha – facing down Evacha – in this way Pancha – five Prachâra – proclaim Hastasya – of hands Nritta – Dance Nâtya – Drama Samâsraya – equally depends</p>
<p>TATTI KUMBIDAL–STAMPING & SALUTATION</p>
<p>Bharata Nâtyam is basically a devotional dance, so before and after every dance session be it a recital or a class, the dancer commences with Salutation, which is known as Tatti Kumbidal in Tamil language.</p>
<p>The simple movement of Salutation signifies high sentiments. The dancer prays for forgiveness for stamping Mother Earth. The salutation starts in SAMAPÂDA position stamping each foot alternatively with KATAKÂ MUKHA MUDRÂ in front of chest. Then comes SIKHARA MUDRÂ which indicates the eight corners of the Universe, followed by PATAKA MUDRÂ to pay respect to Mother Earth, then comes ANJALI MUDRÂ. The ANJALI MUDRÂ above the head is a spiritual salutation to the Almighty God, at the forehead, denotes on intellectual reverence to the teacher and at the chest level, signifies a sincere greeting to the friends and audience from the region of the heart.</p>
<p>22</p>
<p>GANESHA STOTRAM</p>
<p>Ragam : Bhoopalam</p>
<p>Gajânanam bhootha ganâdi sevitam Kapitha jampu phalasâra bhakshitam Umâ sutam shoka vinâsha kâranam Namâmi vigneswara pâda pankajam</p>
<p>Oh elephant headed one, you are worshipped by all. Your food is different kinds of fruits.</p>
<p>You are the son of Umâ and you remove all sorrows and problems.</p>
<p>I bow, before your lotus feet.</p>
<p>Guru Brahma, Guru Vishnu Guru devo Maheswara Guru Sâkshat para Brahma Tasmaishree guruve namaha (3 times).</p>
<p>Oh Brahma-the Guru, you are the creator or Vishnu-the Guru, you are the sustainer of life, You help us make our life fulfilled. On great Shiva-the Guru, you are the greatest teacher who purifies our life. The Universe-you are the greatest Guru (the ultimate truth and knowledge) I bow to you</p>
<p>23</p>
<p>PÂDA BHÉDA</p>
<h5>
<em>Position of the feet & Mandalas </em>
</h5>
<ol>
<li>SAMAPÂDA or STHÂNAKA : The feet are together in natural position with the knees stretched straight and the toes facing the front. </li>
<li>PÂRSHVA : The feet are turned on the sides forming a horizontal line. </li>
<li>ÂLIDDHA : From the Ayata position, the right foot is extended side ways as ANCHITA. </li>
</ol>
<p>5. PRATYÂLIDDHA the opposite of âliddha : From the Ayata position, the left foot is extended side ways as ANCHITA.</p>
<ol>
<li>TRÉYASRA : The feet are placed to form a ‘V’ shape with the toes turned towards the corners. </li>
<li>PRERITA : From the Âyata position, one leg is stretched back and its toes rest on the ground. </li>
</ol>
<p>24</p>
<p>PÂDA BHEDA</p>
<p>or</p>
<p>PÂRSHVA</p>
<p>ÂLIDDHA PRATYÂLIDDHA</p>
<p>TREYASRA PRERITA</p>
<p>25</p>
<ol>
<li>PRENKHANA : The toes of one foot are placed besides the heel of the other. The knees are bent outwards. </li>
<li>VAISHNAVA PÂDA : Standing on one foot, the other is placed obliquely across the first below the knee. </li>
<li>SHAIVA PÂDA : Standing on one foot, the other foot is stretched obliquely across the first above the knee. </li>
<li>EKAPÂDA : Standing on one foot, the other foot is placed on the knee of the first. </li>
<li>NUPURA PÂDA : Standing on one foot with the other leg heel rested on the ankle. </li>
<li>SWASTIKA : The feet are crossed. </li>
</ol>
<p>26</p>
<p>PÂDA BHEDA</p>
<p>SHAIVA PÂDA</p>
<p>PRENKHANA</p>
<p>NUPURA PADA <span><sub>27</sub></span>SWASTIKA</p>
<ol>
<li>AINDRA PÂDA : Standing on one foot, the other is bent at the knee. </li>
<li>ANCHITA PÂDA : Standing on heels with both legs. </li>
<li>KUNCHITA PÂDA : Half sitting on Aramandi position on the toes. </li>
<li>MUZHU MANDALA : This is a sitting posture where the thighs and the shanks are in contact with each other. The back rests on the heel with both feet on the toes. The knees are spread out on the sides. </li>
<li>SAMA SUCHI : Resting on the forepart of the feet, both the knees touch the ground together facing forward. </li>
</ol>
<p>28</p>
<p>PÂDA BHEDA</p>
<p>AINDRA PÂDA</p>
<p>ANCHITA PADA</p>
<p>KUNCHITA PADA</p>
<p>MUZHU MANDALA SAMA SUCHI</p>
<p>29</p>
<ol>
<li>PÂRSHVA SUCHI or MODITA : Resting on the forepart of the feet with either knee touching the ground. </li>
<li>VISHAMA SUCHI : Resting on the forepart of the feet with one leg forward and the other behind both the knees on the ground. </li>
<li>GARUDA PÂDA : A slight variation of VISHAMASUCHI. </li>
<li>BRAHMA STHANAKA : Sitting on one foot on one knee and another foot on the other knee will give rise to Brahma posture. </li>
</ol>
<p>30</p>
<p>PÂDA BHEDA</p>
<p>PÂRSHVA SUCHI or MODITA</p>
<p>VISHAMA SUCHI GARUDA PÂDA</p>
<p>BRAHMA STHANAKA</p>
<p>31</p>
<p>SLOKAS (HYMNS) (Salutation)</p>
<p>PRÂRTHANÂ Ângikam Bhuvanam Yasya</p>
<p>(prayer) Vâchikam Sarva Vângmayam Âhâryam Chandra Târâdi Tham Numa : Sâttvikam Sivam</p>
<p>We bow to the Sâttvika Siva, whose ÂNGIKA (the whole body) is the world, VÂCHIKA (the speech) is the entire langauge, and whose ÂHÂRYA (costume and jewellery) is the moon and the stars etc.</p>
<p>RANGA ADHIDEVATA STUTI (Praise of the goddess of the stage)</p>
<p>Bharata Kula Bhâgya Kaliké Bhâva Rasânanda Parinatâkâré Jagadeika Mohanakalé Jaya Jaya Rangâdhi Devaté Devi</p>
<p>Oh! Goddess of Ranga (stage), victory to Thee, Thou art the patron of the artistes, the embodiment of the joy derived from Bhâvas (States of the Mind) and Rasâs (Sentiments). The whole world can only be charmed by your kalâ (art). Victory to Thee.</p>
<p>PUSHPÂNJALI (Offering of flowers)</p>
<p>Vighnânâm Nâsanam Karthum Bhoothânâm Rakshanâyacha Devânam Thushtayé Châpi Prekshakânâm Vibhootayé Sreyasé Nâyaka Syâtra Pâtra Samrakshanâyacha Âchârya Sikshâ Siddhyartham Pushpânjalim Atthârabhet</p>
<p>To remove all obstacles, to protect all living creatures, to please the Gods, to bring righteousness to spectators, welfare to the Leader, to protect the dancing girl herself, to make the teaching of her Guru fruitful, the dancing girl should begin by offering flowers to the Gods.</p>
<p>I. SLÖKAM : ‘‘ÂNGIKAM BHUVANAM’’ Prayer to Siva</p>
<p>Ângikam – Body Bhuvanam – World Yasya – is (to be) whose Vâchikam – Speech Sarvavângmayam – the entire range of sound (language)</p>
<p>32</p>
<p>Âhâryam Chandra Târâdi Tham Numaha Sâttvikam Sivam</p>
<dl>
<dt>– </dt>
<dd>Costume & Jewellery </dd>
<dt>– </dt>
<dd>Moon & Stars etc. </dd>
<dt>– </dt>
<dd>To Thou </dd>
<dt>– </dt>
<dd>Bow </dd>
</dl>
<p>the genuine emotional (Virgin Nature of expressing emotions)</p>
<p>II. RANGAADHI DEVATA STUTI – Praise of Goddess of the arena of Dance</p>
<p>Bharata Kula Bhâgya Kaliké Bhaava Rasaananda</p>
<p>Parinatâkâré Jagadeika Mohanakalé Jaya Jaya Rangâdhi Devaté Devi</p>
<p>Vighnânâm Naasanam Karthum Bhuthaanam Rakshanaayacha Devânâm Thushtayé Châ Api Prekshakânâm Vibhutayé Sreyase Nâyaka Syâtra Paatra</p>
<dl>
<dt>– </dt>
<dd>Bhâva, Râga, Tâla - ART OF DANCE </dd>
<dt>– </dt>
<dd>Family </dd>
<dt>– </dt>
<dd>Fate </dd>
<dt>– </dt>
<dd>O Bud (addressing it) </dd>
<dt>– </dt>
<dd>Emotion </dd>
<dt>– </dt>
<dd>The happiness from the flavour (of sentiment) </dd>
<dt>– </dt>
<dd>Full form </dd>
<dt>– </dt>
<dd>Only (thing) in the world </dd>
<dt>– </dt>
<dd>O Fine Art (addressing it) </dd>
<dt>– </dt>
<dd>Victory to Thee (To hail) </dd>
<dt>– </dt>
<dd>Holder of the stage </dd>
<dt>– </dt>
<dd>Dominating devi (goddess) </dd>
</dl>
<p>III. PUSHPÂNJALI – offering of flowers</p>
<p>– – – – – – – – –</p>
<p>– – – –</p>
<p>Samrakshanaayacha – Âchârya – Sikshâ – Siddhyartham – Pushpânjalim – Atthârabhét –</p>
<p>33</p>
<p>Of Obstacles To destroy (remove) To do Of all living creatures To protect To Gods To please And also Of Spectators To enlighten Let prosper Leader For him The character For the protection Guru Teaching To achieve Offering of flowers To offer</p>
<p>MAJOR LIMBS AND MINOR LIMBS</p>
<p>‘Ângika’ is named as such because it is expressed in three ways by Anga, Pratyanga and Upânga. Ângg : The six, such as, head, hands, chest, sides (fks), waist (hips) and feet are called Angas. The neck may also be included among these. Pratyanga : The six, such as, shoulder-blades, arms, back, belly, thigh calves and shanks are called Pratyangas. Three move, may be added, such as wrists, elbows and knees to this.</p>
<p>Upânga : Scholars call shoulder an Upânga, and eyes, eyebrows, eyeballs, cheeks, nose, jaw, lips, teeth, tongue, chin and face are also called Upângas.</p>
<p>The following sloka emphasises the esence of dance :</p>
<p>YATO HASTA STATÖ DRISHTI YATO DRISHTI STATÖ MANA YATO MANA STATÖ BHÂVO YATO BHÂVA STATÖ RASA</p>
<p>That is :</p>
<p>Where the hand goes, the glance follows Where the glance leads, the mind follows Where the mind goes, the mood follows Where the mood goes, the real flavour is born</p>
<p>COSTUME FOR PRACTICE</p>
<p>ARAMANDALI POSITION</p>
<p>34</p>
<p>ADAVUS : BASIC DANCE STEPS (KARANÂS)</p>
<p>ADAVUS are the basic steps of Bharata Nâtyam which combine the symmetrical postures, movements of the limbs and the decorative hand gestures - both major and minor strictly adhere to the geometrical figures e.g. circles, squares, angles etc. It is essential to have a thorough knowledge of ADAVUS to achieve perfection in Bharata Natyâm. All the ADAVUS are set to eight beats.</p>
<p>ÂDI TÂLAM notation</p>
<p>All initial steps (adavus) are set to Âdi tâlam. 422 100</p>
<p>Thakadhimi thaka jhonu The main ADAVUS are as follows :</p>
<p>(1) TATTADAVU : In Âyata position the feet strikes the floor alternately with the sole. The four important variations of TATTADAVU are as follows : 12 34 56 78 TAI YÂ TAI – TAI YÂ TAI – BEAT – BEAT – BEAT – BEAT – BEAT BEAT BEAT BEAT BEAT BEAT BEAT BEAT</p>
<p>BEAT BEAT BEAT – BEAT BEAT BEAT – BEAT – BEAT – BEAT BEAT BEAT –</p>
<p>(2) NÂTTADAVU : ‘NÂTTA’ (ÂLIDHA) means to stretch. From the ARAMANDI (ÂYATAPÂRSHVA feet position), one leg is stretched outwards in any direction striking the floor with the heel (ANCHITA feet position) and is then brought back to the original position or behind of the other PÂRSHVA feet position. There are thirteen important variations of this ADAVU.</p>
<p>The syllables are as follows :</p>
<p>TAI YUM TAT THÂ TAI YUM TÂ HÂ</p>
<p>a) The hand movements for NÂTTADAVU start with ADHASTHALA TRIPATÂKA mudra in both arms stretched sideways horizontally. Taiyum when the foot is in Alidha (or Natta) position, the respective hand is upturned as UTTHÂNA and for TATTA it becomes ADHASTHALA again.</p>
<p>b) The same movements as described above are repeated twice on each side.</p>
<p>c) The hands and feet for Tai Yum Tat Tha are same as (a). For ‘Tai’ the right TRIPATÂKA is drawn near the right side of the chest as UTTHÂNA simultaneously</p>
<p>35</p>
<p>the right toes hit the floor behind the left foot. On ‘Yum’ the left foot is stamped, at the same time the right hand becomes ADHASTHALA.On ‘TA’ the right hand is again pushed out to its former position as UTTHÂNA and the right foot is in ALIDHA and ANCHITA foot position. On ‘HA’ the hand becomes ADHOMUKHA and the foot comes back to the starting position. Same movements are repeated on the other side.</p>
<p>d) The movements of (c) are repeated twice on each side.</p>
<p>e & f) The NÂTTA position could be both the front or side; the hand has to be in line with it. For ‘TAI YUM’, the ALAPADMA hand is stretched out and for ‘TAT THA’, the hand is near the chest as KATAKÂMUKHA. For ‘TAI YUM TÂ HÂ’, the same movements are repeated on the other side.</p>
<p>g) The NÂTTA of the leg is in front with two ALAPADMA stretched near the toes for ‘TAI YUM’. For ‘TAT THA’, the hands are near the chest as KATAKÂMUKHA. For ‘TAI YUM TÂ HÂ’ the same movements are repeated on the other side.</p>
<p>h & i) in the next two, three types of feet positions are used :</p>
<p>ÂYATA, ÂLIDHA & PRERITA. The hand gestures are KATAKÂMUKHA & ALAPADMA.</p>
<p>j) With the feet in ÂYATA position jump with both feet on the syllable TAI, on YUM, the right heel is stamped on the floor away from the left foot, on TAT, the left toes stamp the floor behind the right foot, on THÂ, the right foot comes back to the starting position stamping the floor. For TAI YUM TÂ HÂ same movements are repeated on the other side. The hand gestures are KATAKÂMUKHA & ALAPADMA.</p>
<p>k) This variety is jumping with both feet on TAI, stamping the right heel on YUM, the left foot is brought behind the right foot on TAT and these last two sequences are repeated three times finishing at the starting position. The hand gestures are the same as (j).</p>
<p>During the faster speed, the 2nd step in case of (j) and the 2nd, 4th & the 6th step in case of (k) is done with stamping the foot (for the right and left side) instead of the heel.</p>
<p>l) The right TRIPATÂKA hand from NÂTYÂRAMBHA posture is lowered near the right toes for TaI. The body is also bent down alongwith the lowered hand. For YUM, the PARSHVA-ÂYATA, left foot is stamped. For TAT, the lowered hand is raised above the head, simultaneously the right toes hit the floor behind the left foot. Fot THÂ, the left foot is again stamped. This sequence is repeated three times after which the adavu finishes with TAI TAI DHI THI TAI which has to be explained in class.</p>
<p>m) On TAI, the right foot is extended (ANCHITA) to the side. On YUM, the left foot is stamped, on TAT, the right toes hit the floor behind the left foot, on THÂ, the left foot is stamped on the floor, on TAI, jump with the feet together, on YUM, the left foot is stamped on the floor, simultaneously the right foot is brought upto the knee of the left foot, on TÂ, full sitting position on toes, on H, getting up with the feet together (SAMAPÂDA). The hand gestures are a combination</p>
<p>36</p>
<p>of KATAKMUKHA, ALAPADMA, MUSHTI, SÜCHI and PATÂKA. The sequence will be explained in class.</p>
<p>(3) PAKKA ADAVU :</p>
<p>PAKKA means side. The movement is either sideways of diagonally towards the corners. the syllables are as follows :</p>
<p>TA TAI TAI TA DHI TAI TAI TA</p>
<p>Starting posture is Âyata with KATAKÂMUKHA mudra in front of the chest. On TA, stamp the right foot, on TAI, the right foot stamps the floor away from the left simultaneously the right hand is extended forward the UTTHANA ALAPADMA, on TAI, the left toes strike behind the right foot, comes back to the starting position stamping the floor, simultaneously the right hand is brought back to the front over the shoulder with a circular movement. On the next four syllables, the same pattern is repeated on the left side.</p>
<p>(4) KUDICHU TATTA ADAVU/KUTTA ADAVU :</p>
<p>The syllables are as follows :</p>
<p>THEI THEI THAM</p>
<p>Starting with Aramandal position with both hands in KATAKAMUKHA in front of chest. Both feet are raised on the toes and struck on the floor after a slight jump, changing hand into ALAPADMA. Then one by one, the arms now extend to either side corresponding with stamping of the feet, first the right then the left.</p>
<p>The remaining six important varieties will be shown in the class.</p>
<p>(5) TIRMÂNAM ADAVU :</p>
<p>Tirmâna means to conclude. These adavus are used towards the closure of the distinct parts of the concert numbers. They are usually repeated thrice. The work of the feet are TATTA and NÂTTA. There are two varieties in this group. Syllables are as follows :</p>
<p>a) KI NA TOM – (4) (10)</p>
<p>TA DHING KI NA TOM – (6)</p>
<p>TA KA TA DHING KI NA TOM – (8) 10)</p>
<p>TA KA DHI KU TA DHING KI NATOM –</p>
<p>TA KA DHI KU TAKA TADHING KINA TOM (14)</p>
<p>Starting posture is Âyata with TRIPATÂKA hands at the chest level with the palms facing each other. On KI, the right hand moves forward as UTTHÂNA, simultaneously the right foot is extended forward. On NA, the left foot is stamped on the floor and at the same time the right hand is drawn back near the shoulder. On TOM, the right hand is taken to the back with PARÂNMUKHA hand gesture and the right foot comes back to the standing position.</p>
<p>37</p>
<p>b) In the next variety the syllables become as follows :</p>
<p>KITA TOM 4</p>
<p>TARI KITA TOM 6</p>
<p>TÂKA TARI KITA TOM 8</p>
<p>KITA TÂKA TARI KITA TOM 10</p>
<p>TÂKA KITA TÂKA TARI KITA TOM 12</p>
<p>TÂKA DIKU KITA TAKA TÂKA TARI KITA TOM</p>
<p>Foot work is the same as (a). The right PATÂKA hand is in the front and the left hand (also in Patâka) is at the back for ‘TARI’. For ‘KITA’ the left hand is curved up above the head. For ‘TOM’, the hand is lowered as ‘ALAPADMA’. At this moment, the right hand should be on the side in NÂTYÂRAMBHA posture. The slight variations will be explained in the class.</p>
<p>(6) KUDICHU METTU ADAVU :</p>
<p>It literally means jump and beat. Both the feet are raised on to the toes with a slight jump and then strike the floor together with the heel. The body should be in ARAMANDI (half sitting posture) position throughout the sequence of movements.</p>
<p>The syllables are as follows :</p>
<p>TAI HÂ TAI HI TAI HÂ TAI HI</p>
<p>a) Starting position is Âyata and both the hands are in horizontal shape with KATAKAMUKHA mudra. On TAI, jump on the toes and the hands change to ALAPADMA simultaneously, on HÂ, both the heel hit the floor retaining the same hand gesture. On TAI, jump again on the toes with KATAKÂMUKHA hand gesture. On HI, hit the floor with both the heels retaining the same hand gesture. Again for TAI HÂ, ALAPADMA hands cross at the chest and for TAI HI, the arms go back to their original positions.</p>
<p>b) It is same as (a) but, instead of crossing in front of the chest, the ALAPADMA hands cross above the head.</p>
<p>c) From KATAKÂMUKHA in front of the chest, the hands as ALAPADMA are alternately taken backwards curvingly and then brought to the chest region as KATHKÂMUKHA. Then KATAKÂMUKHA hands are alternately brought down to the sides from the chest level as ALAPADMA and curvingly moved above the head.</p>
<p>d) While the left KATAKÂMUKHA hand is in NÂTYÂRAMBHA posture, the right is stretched near the right knee for TAI HÂ. Then it is drawn back to the chest lev el as KATAKÂMUKHA for TAI HI. This movement is repeated twice on each side.</p>
<p>The remaining varieties will be shown in class.</p>
<p>38</p>
<p>(7) TATTI KUDICHU ADAVU :</p>
<p>The feet strike the floor alternately and both the feet are raised on to the toes with a slight jump. One foot is brought back to TATTA position while the other is baced on the toes. TRIPATÂKA hands are used for this adavu.</p>
<p>The syllables are as follows :</p>
<p>TAT TAI TÂ HÂ DHT TAI TÂ HÂ</p>
<p>a) For TAT, right hand is stretched on the side as UTTHÂNA while the left is ADHASTHALA near the chest. For TAI, the reverse of TA is done. For TÂ, the head is tilted down. For HÂ, the right hand becomes UTTHÂNA and the left, ADHASTHALA. For DHIT TAI TÂ HÂ, the same movements are repeated on the other side.</p>
<p>b) For TAT, the right hand is stretched horizontally towards the left corner. TAI TÂ HÂ is the same as TAI TÂ HÂ of (a). Similar movements are done on the other side for DHIT TAI TÂ HÂ.</p>
<p>c) Starting position is ÂYATA with UTTHÂNA TRIPATÂKA mudra in front of the chest with palms slightly turned forward. On TAT, the hands are as UTTHÂNA TRIPATÂKA at the chest level at the same time jump on the toes. On TAI, the right foot is stamped</p>
<p>and the right hand is above the right knee with the slight sideways bending of the body. On TÂ.come back to the original hand position, jumping on the toes. On HÂ, the left hand does the same as the right hand. On DHIT, come back to the original position. On TAI, the right hand is extended upwards with PARÂNMUKHA hand gesture, on TÂ come back to the starting posture, on HÂ do the same as on TAI with the left hand.</p>
<p>d) For TAT TAI, the right hand is lowered near the side of the right knee. For TÂ, it is curvingly taken above the head. For HÂ, the right hand is brought back near the right knee again. The same is repeated on the other side for DHIT TAI TÂ HÂ.</p>
<p>e) For TAI TAT TÂ the right hand is diagonally stretched up on the right side as PARÂ NMUKHA (Palm facing outwards). For HÂ it is made UNMUKHA. (Palm facing inwards). The left hand is UTTHÂNA throughout. The remaining variations of this adavu will be explained in the lesson. This group is also known as ‘ETTA ADAVU’ (Etta means to reach out).</p>
<p>(8) SARIKKAL ADAVU :</p>
<p>SARIKKAL means to slide. One of the feet moves either on the side, front or back while the other is dragged near the former without being lifted up. The syllables are as follows :</p>
<p>a) TAI HÂ DHI TAI TAI HÂ DHI TAI</p>
<p>The initial position is SAMAPÂDA with the left hand extended sideways with UTTHÂNA PATÂKA and the right hand in front of the chest with UTTHÂNA PATÂKA. On TAI, the right foot is stamped on the floor about three span away with</p>
<p>39</p>
<p>the left foot resting on the heel, on HÂ, the left foot is made to slide without raising it from the ground and brought back to SAMAPÂDA simultaneously both the hands slowly change to ADHASTHALAPATÂKA. On DHI, both feet are raised on the heel simultaneously the hands are pointed upwards in PATÂKA mudrâ, on TAI, both the feet beat the floor with a slight hop and the hands come back to ADHASTHALA PATÂKA with a slight patting.</p>
<p>b) This is done with ALAPADMA hand at the chest level and KATAKÂMUKHA mudra above the head.</p>
<p>c) This is performed by moving towards the side the MRIGASIRSHA hand on the shoulder and the other hand let loose on its side.The remaining varieties will be explained in the class.</p>
<p>(9) POICCAL ADAVU :</p>
<p>DHI TAINDA TA TOM DHI TAINDA TA TOM</p>
<p>Starting position is Âyata with both hands in KATAKÂMUKHA mudra in front of the chest. On DHI TAI, stamp the right foot retaining the same hand gesture on - INDA jump sideways with the right foot and the right hand makes on arc upwards with ALAPADMA mudra, on TA, the left toes hit the floor behind the right heel with the right hand extended sideways at shoulder level, on TOM, retain the same posture.</p>
<p>On the next four syllables the same as above is repeated on the left side.</p>
<p>There are ten important varieties which will be shown in the class.</p>
<p>(10 ) TATTIMETTU ADAVU :</p>
<p>This group has five important varieties.</p>
<p>a) TAK KI TTA (Tisram or three beats)</p>
<p>Starting position is PÂRSHVA-ÂYATA feet position with the left hand on the waist and the right hand with TÂMRACHUDA mudra pointing towards the lips. On TA, stamp the right foot, on KI, stamp with the left toes, on TA, stamp with the left heel. Hand gesture remains the same throughout.</p>
<p>b) TA KA DHI MI (Chaturasram or four beats).</p>
<p>Starting position is Âyata. On TA, stamp the right foot, on KA, raise the right heel on toes and then press the floor with the heel. On DHI, stamp the floor with the left toes, on MI, stamp the floor with the left heel. Hand gesture will be the same as (a)</p>
<p>c) TA KA TA KI TA (Khandam or five beats).</p>
<p>Starting position is Âyata. On TA KA, stamp the right foot, on TA KI TA, same as (a). Hand gesture remains the same.</p>
<p>40</p>
<table>
<tr>
<th>d) </th>
<th>TA </th>
<th>KA </th>
<th>DHI </th>
<th>MI </th>
<th>TA </th>
<th>KI </th>
<th>TA </th>
<th>(Misram or seven beats) </th>
</tr>
<tr>
<TD/>
<td>Starting position is Âyata. On TA KA, stamp the right foot, on DHI MI, stamp the right foot, on TÂ KI TA - as in (a). Hand gesture is the same. </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>e) </td>
<td>TÂ KA DHI MI TÂ KA TÂ </td>
<td>KI TÂ (Sankirnam or nine beats). </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<TD/>
<td>Starting position is Âyata, on TÂ KA, stamp the right foot, on DHI MI, stamp the right foot, on TÂ KA, stamp the right foot, on TÂ KI TA, do the same as in (a). </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<TD/>
<td>A slight variation of the hand and eye movement can be explained in the class. Some teachers prefer to have the right foot as Same and the left as Parshva with both knees bent. </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>(11 ) </td>
<td>TATTI NÂTTA ADAVU : </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<TD/>
<td>It means to </td>
<td>strike and to stretch. The syllables are as follows : </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<TD/>
<td>TA</td>
<td> TAI </td>
<td>TÂM </td>
<td>DHI </td>
<td>TAI </td>
<td>TÂM </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<TD/>
<td>Starting position is Âyata with both hands in UNMUKHA SHIKHARA in front of the chest. On TA, the right foot is stamped on the floor retaining the same hand gesture, on TAI, the left foot is stamped with the same hand gesture, on TÂM, the right foot is extended sideways resting on the heel and both the hands are stretched side ways at shoulder level with ADHASTHALA in the same hand gesture. The same will be repeated on the left side. </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<TD/>
<td>There are eight important varieties which will be explained in details in the class. </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>( 12 ) </td>
<td>KORVAI ADAVU : </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<TD/>
<td>i) </td>
<td>TAI </td>
<td>TAI </td>
<td>DHI </td>
<td>TI </td>
<td>TAI </td>
<td>TAI </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<TD/>
<td>Starting position is Âyata with both hands extended sideways with KATAKÂMUKHA mudra facing the front. On TAI, jump on the toes and bring the right hand in front of the chest with UTTHÂNA ALAPADMA. On the second TAI, stamp the right foot and at the same time, the right hand is extended diagonally upwards with KATAKÂMUKHA. On DHI, extend the left heel diagonally forward and stamp it. On TI, stamp the right foot at the original place and the hands remain the same. On TAI, bring the left foot back to Ayata and at the same time bring back the right hand in front of the chest with UTTHÂNA ALAPADMA. On the last TAI, stamp the right foot and at the same time extend the right hand side ways with KATAKÂMUKHA mudra. </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<TD/>
<td>Varieties are shown in the class. </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>(13 ) </td>
<td>MANDI ADAVU : </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<TD/>
</tr>
</table>
<p>41</p>
<p>Adavu gives prominence for the MUZHUMANDALA POSITION. The syllables are as follows :</p>
<p>TAI YUM TAT TÂ TAI YUM TAM</p>
<p>a) Starting position is Muzhumandala with both hands extended sideways with ADHOMUKHA TRIPATÂKA. On TAI YUM, jump on toes and at the same time change the right hand to UTTHÂNA TRIPATÂKA. On TAI TÂ, touch the floor with the right knee and the right hand changes to ADHOMUKHA TRIPATÂKA. On the next four syllables repeat the same on the left side.</p>
<p>b) The above movement is performed with a jump having ALAPADMA hands in front of the chest followed by KATAKÂMUKHA hands taken above the head when the knee touches the floor.</p>
<p>c) For the jump, the hands are at the chest level as KATAKÂMUKHA. Then the right foot is stretched towards the side as ANCHITA (toes are held up when the heel rests on the ground). The left knee touches the floor and the two hands are stretched diagonally as ALAPADMA.</p>
<p>d) The MUZHUMANDALA jump has the right hand stretched down as ALAPADMA and the left as KATAKÂMUKHA on the side. This is followed by EKAPÂDA posture when the right hand goes to the chest as KATAKÂMUKHA.</p>
<p>e) (12a) is performed once on the right for TAI YUM TAT TÂ. For TAI YUM TÂM, both the knees are made to fall on the ground. the back then rests on the floor. This is followed by slightly stretching the right leg while the left is still contracted. The left hand is near the chest and the right is stretched on the side. The TRIPATÂKA hands are turned as PARÂNMUKHA. For the next TAI YUM TAT TÂ, the right foot is taken across the left side and placed flatly on the ground with its knee raised. the right hand is stretched forward as ALAPADMA and the left is above the head as KATAKÂMUKHA. For TAI YUM TAM, the body raises and rotates on the left side ending in SAMA posture. Now the right hand also becomes KATKÂMUKHA at the chest level.</p>
<p>Further variations will be shown in class.</p>
<p>( 14 ) SUTRAL ADAVU :</p>
<p>It means to whirl. The syllables are as follows :</p>
<p>TA KA DHI MI TA KA JA NU</p>
<p>Starting position is Âyata with left hand above the head with UTTHÂNA KATAKÂMUKHA and the right hand in front of the chest with ADHASTHALA KATAKÂMUKHA. On TA KA, extend the right hand to the right side with UTTHANA ALAPADMA. On DHI MI, raise the right foot above the left knee and whirl around bringing the right hand back to the original position. On TA KA JA NU, repeat the same on the left side. There are three more important varieties which will be explained in class.</p>
<p>These are only the main adavus. There are many more subsidiary adavus. All the adavus can be performed on a variety of rhythms and patterns.</p>
<p>42</p>
<section class="level2 numbered" id="id-.">
<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">KALAMANDALAM</h2>
<p>PERFORMING ARTS & RESEARCH CENTRE (Regd. Under The West Bengal Societies Act, 1961) Registration No. S/62186</p>
<p>7/2B, Dovere Kolkata - 700 029 Phone : 2461-8454, 2461-8338, Fax : 2461-8454 E -mail : kalacal@cal3.vsnl.net.in Website : http://www.kalamandalam-calcutta.com</p>
<h3>Kalamandalam Performing Arts & Research Centre </h3>
<p>P-20, C.I.T. Scheme No. 118, 49/64, Prince Golam Md. Shah Road Golf Gardens, Kolkata-700033. Phone : 2422-2034</p>
<p>43<span>44 </span></p>
</section>
</section>
</body>
</html>
