<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>MEIN KAMPF</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d.1">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">INTRODUCTION</h1>
		<p>Born on April 20, 1889, in a small town in Upper Austria, on the border with Germany, Hitler was the third son and the fourth of six children of Alois Hitler, a minor customs official, and Klara Pölzl, his second cousin, and third wife. Alois was born illegitimate and for the first thirty-nine years of his life bore his mother’s name, Schicklgruber. The name Hitler appears in the maternal and paternal line. Both Hitler’s grandmother on his mother’s side and his grandfather on his father’s side were named Hitler.</p>
		<p>As a youth, Hitler constantly had arguments with his father over the choice of his career. Alois wanted his son to follow a career as a customs official, though Hitler wanted to become a painter. This affected his education as well and Hitler faired rather inadequately on the academic front.</p>
		<p>After his father’s death, in the years that followed, Hitler appeared for art tests, but was rejected twice by the Academy of Fine Arts Vienna due to unfitness for painting. After his mothers demise, he worked as a struggling painter in Vienna. It was during this time that Hitler began taking interest in politics and developed the notion that the Jews were natural enemies of what he called the Aryan race. He held them responsible for Austria’s crisis. At times, he would also blame personal crises on Jews.</p>
		<p>During World War I, Hitler participated actively for France and Belgium as a messenger for the regimental headquarters of the 16th Bavarian Reserve Regiment, which exposed him to enemy fire. However, unlike his fellow soldiers, he never complained about the food or hard conditions, preferring to talk about art or history.</p>
		<p>He was also appointed a Verbindungsmann (police spy) of an Aufklärungskommando (Intelligence Commando) of the Reichswehr, for influencing other soldiers. He was discharged from the army in March 1920. By this time, he had become an excellent orator, a quality that made him capture the hearts of Germans, and inevitably made him their sole hero. Apart from criticising rival politicians, he would attack Jews in his speeches. Soon, he became politically strong and prominent. However, the path to victory was not an easy one and he had to spend time in jail as well.</p>
		<p>Hitler oversaw one of the greatest expansions of industrial production and civil improvement Germany had ever seen. Nazi policies toward women strongly encouraged them to stay at home to bear children and keep house. The unemployment rate was cut substantially, mostly through arms production and sending women home so that men could take their jobs.</p>
		<p>He also oversaw one of the largest infrastructure improvement campaigns in German history, with the construction of dozens of dams, autobahns, railroads and other civil works. Further, he destroyed many Jewish businesses and synagogues and resulted in about 100 deaths. Finally, Jews started fleeing Germany and the Nazis seized whatever property they left behind. He led out the mass execution of Jews. The massacres led by him led to the coining of the word ‘genocide’. Further, he tried to dominate other countries to make Germany stronger.</p>
		<p>Hitler’s dictatorship, however, could not stay for long. When his power started fading in front of forces from other countries, he committed suicide in the Führerbunker by means of a selfdelivered shot to the head. His body and that of Eva Braun (his long-term mistress whom he had married the day before) were put in a bomb crater, partially burned with gasoline.</p>
		<p><em>Mein Kampf</em> is the signature work of Adolf Hitler, combining elements of autobiography with an exposition of Hitler’s political ideology of Nazism. In this book, Hitler described everything starting from his childhood playground to his fight with forces of bigger countries.</p>
		<p>The book outlines major ideas that later culminated in World War II. It is heavily influenced by Gustave Le Bon’s 1895 The Crowd: A Study of the Popular Mind, which theorized propaganda as an adequate rational technique to control the seemingly irrational behaviour of crowds.</p>
		<p>In the book, he announced his hatred toward what he believed to be the twin evils of the world: Communism and Judaism, and stated that his aim was to eradicate both from the face of the earth.</p>
		<p>Before Hitler became chancellor of Germany in 1933, <em>Mein Kampf</em> sold very slowly; but in 1933 alone it sold 1.5 million copies. Although the Nazi Party (NSDAP) claimed that it was already a huge seller, documents revealed after the end of World War II showed this to be false.</p>
		<p>After Hitler’s rise to power, the book gained enormous popularity and virtually became the Bible of every Nazi. Every couple intending to get married was required to own a copy. Sales of Mein Kampf earned him millions; however, many of those who purchased it barely read it, and many bought it simply to show their allegiance to Hitler, gain position in the NSDAP, or avoid the attentions of the Gestapo.</p>
		<p>By the end of the war, about 10 million copies of the book had been distributed in Germany. Today, the book is available in many languages. During the past years, translated and unabridged works of <em>Mein Kampf</em> have taken rounds of the globe.</p>
		<p>The present book is a record of Hitler’s life in his own words and his hatred towards Jews and communists. At one hand where it fills the readers with disgust for the horrifying acts that he did, on the other hand, it also stands as a perfect example of a struggler who stood for his country till the end.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
