<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Surya Namaskara – with Pranayama, Mudras &amp; Bandha and Accupressure</title>
	<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000b">
		<h1 class="level1-title hide" epub:type="title">Copyright</h1>
		<p>Surya Namaskara</p>
		<p>by Rajendra Damodara Yenkannamoole</p>
		<p>Published by:</p>
		<p><strong>Prism Books Pvt. Ltd.</strong></p>
		<p># 1865, 32nd Cross, 10th Main, <br />BSK II Stage, Bengaluru - 560 070. <br />Phone: 080-26714108, Telefax: 080-26713979 <br />email: logistics@prismbooks.com</p>
		<p><em>Also at:</em></p>
		<p><strong>Chennai :</strong> Tel.: 044-24311244, email: prismchennai@prismbooks.com</p> 
		<p><strong>Hyderabad :</strong> Tel.: 040-27612938, email: prismhyderabad@prismbooks.com</p> 
		<p><strong>Kochi :</strong> Tel.: 0484-4000945, email: prismkochi@prismbooks.com</p> 
		<p><strong>Kolkata :</strong> Tel.: 09831537010, email: prismkolkata@prismbooks.com</p>
		<p>All rights reserved. No part of this book shall be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, magnetic, photographic including photocopying, recording or by any information storage and retrieval system, without prior written permission of the author. No parent liability is assumed with respect to use of information contained herein. Although every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher and the author assumes no responsibility for errors or omissions. Neither is any liability assumed for damages resulting from the use of the information contained herein.</p>
		<p>© Rajendra Damodara Yenkannamoole, 2017</p>
		<p>Please, send your comments to Rajendra Damodara Yenkannamoole</p>
		<p>E-mail: vasudevakriyayoga@gmail.com</p>
		<p>www.vasudevakriyayoga.com</p>
		<p>YouTube/facebook: Vasudeva Kriya Yoga Melbourne, Bangalore</p>
		<p>Pages: 168</p>
		<p>Printed on 80 gsm Maplitho</p>
		<p>India: 275.00</p>
		<p>Abroad: US$ 20</p>
		<p>ISBN: 978-81-7286-234-3</p>
		<p>Book Design: enablePrint Services Pvt. Ltd., Bengaluru.</p>
		<p>Printers: Sreeranga Printers Pvt. Ltd., Bengaluru</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
