<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Shoonya</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d.1">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">preface</h1>
		<p><strong>T</strong>his work evolved as a book over a period of five years. I must fondly recollect the initial days when it started off as a mail chain to a couple of my close friends. At that time it was only a gesture of sharing thoughts and experiences through e-mails. I never had the slightest inkling that it would transform one day into a series of quotes and reflections compiled into a book. From its inception in the year 2006, in a span of over three years, the recipient list of these e-mails increased as I kept adding more and more of my friends to this list (and my friends, in turn, kept adding their friends to my list). Over time, it gained immense popularity as a forum called the WoW forum (the acronym WoW standing for <strong>W</strong>ords <strong>o</strong>f <strong>W</strong>isdom).</p>
		<p>Today, there are quite a number of members in this WoW forum and I must profusely thank each one of them. Without their inspiration, encouragement, active participation, wisdom, compliments and blessings, it would not have been possible for me to accomplish this work of art and spiritualism. Their overwhelming support and the flood of energetic, catalytic and cathartic debates, discussions and synergy humbled my ego many a time and made it bow in gratitude to the elevated learning and self-discoveries that unfolded through this spiritual odyssey.</p>
		<p>While I journeyed through each and every quote followed by the reflections, I discovered more and more of my own ego and also how identified my being was with this world. There were times when I was challenged to accept my egos. This was not easy as it was once again for the same reasons of clinging, bondage and desires that I had identified with the material world. As I composed each of these quotes, I was only outpouring my inner ego and my identity only melted further. My attachments gradually transcended as these got channeled through my writings.</p>
		<p>I must acknowledge with a prostrated gesture (head bowed, folded hands and body stretched forward) to the enlightened master Osho whose spontaneous commentaries have bathed my being in sacred blessings. Even though I did not have the fortune to meet the master in person, I had the benediction of being a part of his experiences on the myriad of topics he discussed through transcribed books and videos.</p>
		<p>I must (and without any shame and embarrassment) admit openly that master Osho has influenced me so strongly that there were times I was lost in my own identity and could not make out if it was a mystical current that carried me or whether I was just a child in the lap of the master’s prowess. This mental impact was so strong that my subconscious mind started to gratify my ego simply because my own experiences of this mystical life resonated with that of the master. This also led to my style of writing in the same way as Osho used to talk. My ego was tickled, pampered and cherished many a time - even when my friends used to mock me to be the living Osho. I had to accept this as a compliment and the joy was spuriously blissful since the words flowed seamlessly, without any conscious effort on my part to imitate master Osho. How could I (or anyone) even attempt to do such a mammoth task? It is impossible for anyone even to vibrate to Osho’s frequencies, leave alone imitate it. Those were compelling, rebellious and melting moments. It is with deep reverence that I would like to humbly say this work of spiritual writing is just a drop in the oceanic wisdom Osho carried through his enlightened being.</p>
		<p>I must thank Paramahamsa Yogananda for showering me with his spirited blessings through his masterpiece “An autobiography of a yogi”. This book was a revolution in my spiritual experience and catapulted my being to an altogether new consciousness. The mystic esoteric experiences of this book were enthralling and the mystery it unfolded were beyond words. This book shall always be one of my favorite books.</p>
		<p>I would like to acknowledge the wealth of experience I underwent through the book “A search in secret India” by Paul Brunton, one of the greatest philosophical explorers of our times. Paul Brunton explores the deep mystics, fakirs and sadhus living for more than a thousand years in the Himalayan caves and the elucidation in his writing style is a marvel to admire and cherish.</p>
		<p>My deepest respects to Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, Sri Ramana Maharishi, Sri Gaudapada and Swami Chinmayananda under whose lotus feet (through the medium of their books) my ego has melted into its true form and under whose divine grace my being was energized even as I wrote these quotes and reflections.</p>
		<p>My heartfelt reverence to the profound depthI discovered in Lord Krishna’s Gita, whose awakened talks has had a huge impact in me. With folded hands and bowed head, I offer my humble gratitude to the spiritual treatise I discovered in the Vedas and Upanishads. Indeed Vedas and Upanishads are not just scriptures–they are mirrors of existence, the soul of manifestation, the heart of spiritual wisdom.</p>
		<p>I must with utmost gratitude mention some of the books that influenced me including Paramahamsa Yogananda’s masterpiece “An autobiography of a yogi”, Paul Brunton’s “A search in secret India”, Swami Rama’s treatise “Living with the Himalayan masters”, Jitatmatmananda’s – “Holistic Science and Vedanta”, Sri Gudapadacharya’s exploratory work on the Mandukya Upanishad–known as Mandukya Karikas, master Osho’s most comprehensive book of meditation that encompasses sixty types of meditative <strong>techniques – </strong><em>“Meditation: the first and last freedom</em>”, Swami Chinmayananda’s down-to-earth book on contemplation that touch the chords of a common man directly – “<em>Art of contemplation</em>”, Lao Tsu’s – “<em>Tao Te Ching</em>” , Ramanujacharya’s “<em>Vedarthasangraha”</em> and Adi Shankara’s – “<em>Vivekachoodamani”</em>.</p>
		<p>I also want to acknowledge the blessings from my parents and their lineage without which this work could not have been achieved. Born to a <em>Vishistaadvaitic</em> family, I consider it my fortune to have come across <em>Ramanujacharya</em> whose philosophy has influenced my spiritual consciousness.</p>
		<p>I would like to extend my sincere heart felt thanks for Swami Sukhabodhanandha for having lent his personal time, sharing his love and blessings through the foreword he has written for this book.</p>
		<p>I love to thank Prism Books Pvt. Ltd., especially Mr. Pranesh, the Director, for his support, sincerity &#38; professionalism in publishing this book.</p>
		<p>My sincere thanks to Mrs. Hema Rao for her valuable time and eye-for-detail in sharpening the English and grammar across the content of this book.</p>
		<p>I like to extend my thanks to many of my close associates (Chandan Bilgunda, Venkatatraman Mahadevan, Vasudevan Belakavadi, Manjunath Madhavrao to name a few), without whose synergy, this work would not be possible.</p>
		<p>I want to express that even though the spirit of my being is significantly elevated through this work, I still consider myself a common man lingering in the web of desires, bondage and <em>Maya</em>. While the transformations have been wondrous and the experiences mystic, at some level my search still continues subconsciously. If I didn’t have the ego, I would not have been</p>
		<p>My heartfelt thanks to Dr. Sumanth Kaushik, Shri Suresh Heblikar and many others who helped in reviewing this book.</p>
		<p>I want to express that even though the spirit of my being is significantly elevated through this work, I still consider myself a common man lingering in the web of desires, bondage and Maya. While the transformations have been wondrous and the experiences mystic, at some level my search still continues subconsciously. If I didn’t have the ego, I would not have been writing this book. The very fact that I am expecting people to read this book is enough to accept my identification with Maya. This paradoxical nature of existence has baffled me and left my being in absolute timelessness. There are still some questions haunting me maybe because these questions themselves are invalid or maybe because the wheel of life is yet to complete washing away my ignorance. Nevertheless, I must confess that the way life has unfolded in me is spiritually enriching and absolutely phenomenal.</p>
		<p>There is this living of every moment that poses a mystic quantum of energy that is baffling, debating, accepting, rejecting, contemplating and introspecting but in the end, it moves on seamlessly, blissfully and ecstatically to shores unknown, unheard of and unfathomable.</p>
		<p class="text-right"><strong>Sreesha Belakvaadi</strong></p>
	</section>
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d.2">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Foreword</h1>
		<p>I have glanced through the book and my prayers and blessings for this loving effort to unfold the teachings of enlightened masters. To know and not to act of what you know is equal to not knowing. Words are beautiful but the meaning is more important than the words. More than the meaning the context of the meaning has to be captured by one’s heart and one’s being.</p>
		<p>Words can be deceptive and one has to go beyond the words to get the significance of what any author is attempting to unfold; there is an art to read and learn. I invite the readers to read this book from such a context. There is a center in one where words are born out of silence and when placed where the heart can feel them and hear. It is in this space one has to read, learn and grow.</p>
		<p>Learning through the mind gives knowledge while learning through silence gives intuitive wisdom. The author is lovingly leading the readers to explore into this dimension. One lives life in fragments and to be total in what one is doing is like worship in another dimension. People have stopped learning to be total, they live their lives in fragments and thus the fragmented life leads to samsara… the life of deficiency. From samsara to nirvana is the pathless path.</p>
		<p>More than God it is Godliness one has to discover. God is all-pervading and hence his essence is in and through the manifestation of life. As the author points out, one has to be like a child … childlike innocence. But our egos are making us childish. There is a distinction between childlike and childish. When once one is innocent like a child and in that innocence there is an intuitive understanding of the movement of the whole.</p>
		<p>Most of us are caught in our roles of a husband, wife, boss… and the whole of one’s life is lived in the pigeon hole of those roles. We are entrapped by our roles. We miss to see the wholeness of life in which our roles are included but not excluding the whole.</p>
		<p>There is one type of knowing by words which leads to knowledge. This is like the photo of you but not the real you. There is another type of knowing where in a state of being one is learning the art of knowing. To “Be” is to Know. Be bliss, Be filled with love, Be silence and that knowing is truly being wise.</p>
		<p>Reflect on this story.</p>
		<p>A student asked his master, “What is the difference between a teacher and a master”</p>
		<p>The master replied, “A teacher carries a torch light in his hand and guides others; whereas a master becomes the torch light.”</p>
		<p>A spiritual journey is a state of transformation from knowledge to wisdom. I wish Sreesha Belakvaadi the very best. And I am sure the readers will be benefitted by his effort that has gone into this book. My prayers and blessings to all those involved in bringing out this book.</p>
		<p class="text-right"><strong>Swami Sukhabodhandanda</strong></p>
		</section>
</body>
</html>
