<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Shoonya</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d.1">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Introduction</h1>
		<p>his existence is so mysterious – every moment we are baffled by its esoteric nature, by its irrational surprises and the</p>
		<p>plethora of wondrous paradoxes it throws upon us.</p>
		<p>There is no reason as to why the rivers flow or the mountains remain stationary. There is no rationale as to why only birds fly and humans do not. There is no purpose as to why there is a Universe in itself under the sea or in the atomic world. There may not be a good reason for the cause and effect. However, in the larger realm, perhaps it is this flux–like nature of existence that keeps us going and keeps us moving with the wheel of life, of being alive and vibrant. Perhaps it is this consistency in the inconsistency that has simulated an aura of intrigue carrying the freshness every time you come to think of it. In fact, there is an absolute perfection in this imperfection because it seems all dimensions of complexities are induced in the right quantum so that existence poses a certain quality of equilibrium, strong enough to make sure science or logic cannot conquer the nuances of its mystic or esoteric nature.</p>
		<p>Is humanity greater than Godliness? This question will always baffle us in its limited framework. Is Ego good or bad? It is so natural to persist, to breathe or make an identity in this material world. Is there any purpose for attempting to understand Godliness? What sense does it make to contemplate on things that have always remained intangible right from when the Universe was born? These are some of the strongly ingrained subconscious conditionings we have been impregnated with. Fortunately, there are no straight</p>
		<p>Shoonya-final layout.pmd</p>
		<p>answers since even the questions may have no meaning. That is why life is so interesting.</p>
		<p>The multitude of expressions life throws at us are subtle gestures of Godliness. The vivacious energy that encompasses us works dualistically – it gives you the aura to elevate spiritually and at the same time opens up the equally complimentary world of Maya so that our being can jostle in this flux, flow in this contradiction and glide through the paradoxical maze of endless enigma.</p>
		<p>Shoonya is a stateless state, an absolute nothingness, where neither space nor time has an identity. In fact, language is impotent to express this statelessness because it cannot be rationalized. It’s measureless, dimensionless, stateless and any attempt to define it will only fall short of it. Even the word nothing can (in some sense) be something as in space or emptiness. However, Shoonya is far subtler and hence, the word “nothingness” (which is the “qualitative attribute” of the word “nothing”) can come closest in language to it though it is still incomplete. This spiritual–abyss, this all–pervading energy (again energy maybe the closest language that can describe nothingness) – Shoonya – is the final destination. This Shoonya is the abode of Godliness. This Shoonya is what you are. This Shoonya alone is you.</p>
		<p>And the most ironical and beautiful part of all this linguistic hypotheses is the fact that all this can be discussed and comprehended only in the realm of Maya. This Shoonya is an expression only in this state where there is constant flux of Maya and divinity; this Shoonya can be battled only through the channel of ego–energy. When Shoonya is exposed in its naked form, there is no knowledge or intellect or consciousness. There is no such word such as Godliness or even nothingness when Shoonya stands in its absoluteness. Words such as bliss, statelessness, divinity – all have evaporated leaving behind pure isness. This pure isness is you… and you alone!</p>
		<p class="text-right">Read on!</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
