<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>CHAMPIONING the BOSSES</title>
	<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Foreword</h1>
		<p>Mr. Lal Bahadur Shastri, the second Prime Minister (PM) of India was not exactly the “boss” of Dr. Verghese Kurien, best known as the “Father of the White Revolution”. But I would like to briefly narrate an incident involving these two outstanding individuals, and how Shastriji got some work done through Dr. Kurien. I am sharing this story because it illustrates a few of the points that Prof. Moid Siddiqui powerfully brings out in this book.</p>
		<p>Shastriji had heard of the wonderful results that Dr. Kurien had achieved in the milk co-operative in Anand, and wanted this success to spread to other parts of the country. To begin with, the then PM was a person with a keen understanding of the farming sector. So he wanted to gain a first-hand understanding of how Anand had achieved its stupendous success. In an unprecedented move, he decided to spend a night in one of the villages in Anand as a guest of a small farmer. He felt that this would give him an opportunity to explore the issue at the grassroots level and help him gain certain personal insights. He walked around the village, spoke to several farmers and tried to discover the secret of Anand’s success.</p>
		<p>When the PM met Dr. Kurien the following day, he mentioned that despite his efforts, he had failed to learn the secret of why Anand was successful while the other government cooperatives were such unmitigated disasters. “<em>I looked at the soil here; it is good but not as good as the Indo-Gangetic plain</em>,” said the PM. “<em>I looked at your climate, and there is nothing special there. The rainfall pattern is similar to what it is in large parts of India. I expected this place to be green with contented cows grazing, but this place is brown. Your buffaloes don’t look as good as the buffaloes I remember in Uttar Pradesh. While farmers are all good people, your farmers don’t appear as hard working as the Punjabi farmers. So I cannot find a single reason why Anand is such a great success</em>”.</p>
		<p>Dr. Kurien responded: “<em>Sir, the main difference is that this dairy is owned by farmers, and managed by their elected representatives. They have employed me as a professional manager to run this dairy. I am an employee of the farmers, not on deputation from the government. If I don’t satisfy the farmers, I don’t get merely transferred – I lose my job.When they produce more milk, I am expected to find market. I can never say that I can’t collect more. When they tell me to increase productivity, I have to think of ideas such as cattle feed or inputs to farmers. So this dairy is sensitive to the needs of the farmers. In the other dairies in India, this is not the case. In the absence of responsiveness and support in obtaining the inputs, managing their processes or marketing their outputs, farmers are unable to improve their production and productivity. Anand shows that what is true of New Zealand or Holland is true of India also</em>”. The PM listened attentively and said softly, “<em>In other words, you’re saying that Anand’s success can be replicated</em>”. When Dr. Kurien nodded his agreement, Shastriji said, “<em>Now I want you to achieve the same result at the national level. That is the challenge that I want you to take up</em>”. That marked the formation of the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) and the initiation of ‘Operation Flood’ that transformed India from being a milk-deficient nation to the largest milk producer in the world.</p>
		<p>In the above incident, Shastriji clearly displayed a number of qualities of positive bosses that Prof. Siddiqui talks about in this interesting book. First, he was a great learner – showing curiosity while being focused on achieving a larger purpose, trying to learn from not only own experience, but also from the experience of others, listening, demonstrating humility, and involving himself in a free and open conversation. As a Pygmalion leader, he inspired Dr. Kurien to take up the challenge of creating on a national canvas what he had achieved in Anand.</p>
		<p>At the same time, Dr. Kurien serves as a role model for a competent professional. In line with what Prof. Siddiqui writes, he viewed the Prime Minister, an individual in higher position neither as an adversary nor as an object of flattery. He communicated his views clearly, frankly and persuasively. Then he utilized the opportunities provided to him by making significant contributions to a larger cause. Rather than merely “taking a role” that was defined for him by the organization or the larger system, Dr. Kurien actively “shaped his role” by articulating his views openly but constructively, initiating new ideas and displaying commitment.</p>
		<p>This book consistently advances an important idea. As Prof. Siddiqui demonstrates through numerous examples, a number of bosses and subordinates in organizations limit themselves to <em>position power</em>. They only think of tangible aspects such as titles, positions, rewards and punishments. By doing so, they get people to achieve, at best, <em>conformity</em> to instructions. They are never able to generate commitment. For commitment, willing acceptance has to flow from below. This will happen only when managers go beyond issues at cognitive or rational level and address any emotional and relationship matters that have not been explicitly spoken about, but form a part of the employee concerns. As these leaders take a comprehensive perspective of head, heart and gut level issues, interactions with them become attractive for the followers. These leaders also provide opportunities for pursuing learning and excellence. Such a leadership approach gives <em>personal power </em>to the bosses<em>,</em> and so they gain <em>commitment </em>of their subordinates.</p>
		<p>Peter Drucker, considered the father of modern management once wrote that we spend a lot of time helping leaders learn what to do. He argued that we don’t spend enough time helping leaders learn what to stop. Prof. Moid Siddiqui gives valuable tips on what behaviors rob leaders of their effectiveness. These are things that leaders should stop. They should stop focusing only on the negative aspects, evaluating in a manner that saps people of their energy and enthusiasm, or being excessively preoccupied with blowing their own trumpet. Instead, the leaders should accentuate the positive, catch people doing right things, provide understanding, and be committed to own and others’ learning. He makes these points through case illustrations and personal experiences that are engaging, witty and persuasive. I am sure that the readers will not only enjoy reading this book, but will also gain from it valuable insights for enhancing their own effectiveness both as bosses and as followers.</p>
		<p class="quote-author">Prof. S. Ramnarayan<br />Indian School of Business (ISB)</p>		
	</section>
</body>
</html>	
