<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>CHAMPIONING the BOSSES</title>
	<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000e">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Preface</h1>
		<p>Bosses are not <em>bête noire</em>! Yet many regard them as their adversaries. We forge ahead with this mistaken view without understanding our boss’s nature, habits and preferences. Bosses too are human beings and like every human being, they also have their own likes and dislikes. What is needed is a bit of adjustment here and there. A bit of tinkering!</p>
		<p>You cannot change the world. You have to adjust (perhaps even change) with the world. This does not warrant that you have to leave behind your own principles and ideals. What is required is a positive mind-set; one that is capable of seeing the world with a different perspective to understand its positive aspects. Likewise, you cannot change the habits of your boss or force him to change his set of likes and dislikes. You have to adjust (maybe even change) with him. You need to develop a new mind-set to understand him and this entails adopting a different perspective to positively interact with him. Your job is to motivate your juniors, educate and train them so as to get the best output from them. You are paid for doing this. You are not paid to educate and train your bosses. Many develop this mistaken notion and get into relationship problems with their bosses. If our bosses are really our <em>bete noire</em>, we have made them so. We have never tried to understand them. You always get what you look for. Keep the focus on the solution, not on the problem. The good news is that bosses can be influenced and inspired. All that we need to do is show patience and decency. There is really only one route to reach out to them – through the route of your heart.</p>
		<p>Exceptions are always there and we cannot shy away from the realities of our personal life and corporate life. Yes, there are difficult bosses. But all difficult bosses are not bad; only some are bad. The ‘bad’ bosses fall in the category of ‘exception’!</p>
		<p>The World has changed and this has changed the Corporate World as well. Those who have many complaints about their bosses have not seen the bosses of the past. In yesterday’s World, many would have become bosses by virtue of seniority. Departments and disciplines like administration, public relations, accounts, personnel and welfare were the <em>babus’</em> paradise – clerks and account clerks could rise to the highest positions in the course of time. Even in the technical departments, skilled workers with ITI qualifications or short-term diplomas used to get senior positions. Those were the difficult days where ‘good bosses’ were the exception. Today, the situation is different. Bad bosses now fall into the category of ‘exception’.</p>
		<p>If you go to the roots of ‘Boss-hood’ or ‘Boss-ship’ you will discover that the first boss was a ‘Foreman’ whose role in the factories and mines was just the same as the role of a Ringmaster in the circus. A great transformation has taken place since then. In fact, I am a witness to such transformations. Even in those days, when the use of the whip was not considered ‘bad’, I have seen many ‘self-inspired’ Ringmasters without any whip in their hands.</p>
		<p>Have we ever tried to find out who were the ancestors of bosses? The ancestors of bosses were ‘Masters’ in the epoch of slavery and ‘Landlords’ in the era of ‘agricultural society’. Industrial society has evolved from ‘agricultural society’. Obviously, some ailments of the earlier societies are bound to exist. The transformation of industrial society into knowledge society has brought about a significant change in leadership styles. The Corporate World has changed significantly. Though it has worsened in many aspects (due to its materialistic and capitalistic approach) it has, however, shown a remarkable improvement in the area of leadership.</p>
		<p>“Companies used to be able to function with autocratic bosses. We do not live in that world any more.” These words of Rosabeth Moss Kanter - a great management Guru and the author of many well-known management books, viz. ‘The Change Masters’, ‘Super Corp’, ‘e-Volve’- should be written in gold.</p>
		<p>Times have since changed. In fact, I find a sea change! With the advent of the IT industry and ‘Knowledge’ now the Goddess of Worship, the position has drastically changed. Management books and training workshops on the theme of ‘Leadership’, ‘Motivation’, ‘Team work’ and ‘Inter-personal relationships’ are the major contributory factors for causing transformation in today’s bosses. Authors like Ken Blanchard and Dr Stephan R Covey must be given the lion’s share of credit for bringing about change in the mind-set of many CEOs. This book is also a humble attempt in the same direction.</p>
		<p>Yet, ‘how to get along well with the bosses’ is still an issue. This fact cannot be denied. Though such ‘unmanageable’ bosses may be insignificant in number, they do pose a problem.</p>
		<p>In my workshops, I always get suggestions from managers and senior managers that I should first train their bosses. It is their bosses who should first learn the lessons of ‘leadership’ . Many share their problems and issues with bosses. Many say, “I have joined the company because the company is very good. But I shall soon be leaving the company because of one single person – the boss!” Many delegates requested me to author a book on this burning issue. Though there are many books on this important theme, most of them fall in the category of ‘In the Wonderland of Indian Administrators’ – sarcastic and caustic, and projecting the boss as a villain or a buffoon. I do not subscribe to such frivolous solutions for this serious problem. Yet such solutions do crop up from a few misguided missiles.</p>
		<p>I am lucky to have had good bosses in abundance. However, the ‘normal bell curve’ was not an exception. I did face some typical bosses; a couple of them were very difficult to get along with. In fact, many of them became my favourite bosses when I just scratched the surface and located their inner selves. In this book I have shared some of my real experiences relevant to this theme. I have tried my best to avoid hype as well as sarcasm by adhering to authenticity in reporting my personal experiences. I have dealt with 14 varieties of bosses, ranging from ‘Pygmalion’ to ‘Gotcha’ bosses with nuances of pleasant and unpleasant profiles. You will find that the negative variety of bosses is more in number! This does not indicate that they form the majority. I have projected many varieties of negative bosses purposely as they need to be ‘corrected’; they should get benefit from this book. As Norman Schwarzkopf rightly observes, “You learn far more from negative leadership than from positive leadership. Because you learn ‘How not to do it’, and therefore, you learn ‘How to do it’.”</p>
		<p>While assigning ‘titles’ to the bosses , I have used some existing titles and also coined many new titles which may become management metaphors tomorrow My prize-winning book, ‘The Brave New Manager’, published by McGraw Hill ( 1995), created the metaphor ‘Brave New Manager’.</p>
		<p>If my work helps managers to have a good relationship with their bosses, and grants wisdom to some Gotcha bosses to correct themselves, I will know that I have finally attained corporate <em>Nirvana</em>.</p>
		<p class="quote-author">Moid Siddiqui<br />reachus@intellects.biz<br /> moidsiddiqui@gmail.com</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>	
