<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
   <title>Life Sutra</title>
   <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-00c">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span>Foreword</span></h1>	
		<p>This book <strong>Life Sutra</strong> is a compilation from my talks in yoga classes stretched over the past two decades. The essence of yoga is contained in this book and is easy to understand and will help to infuse life in us.</p>
		<p><strong>Life Sutra</strong> is a compilation of small messages in English which has dawned to me over the years of my sadhana. <strong>Life Sutra</strong> covers various dimensions of life like karma, knowledge, food, meditation, inner journey, death, health and wellness, yoga, nature, sustainable living, ethical living etc. These messages will help in inspiring and motivating us to come out of our ordinary mundane life. This book will wake up a lazy and lethargic mind and take it to the pinnacle of success. We are what we think. Think good, think great, think auspicious and undoubtfully the life will be glorious.</p>
		<p>I believe these messages will inspire seekers to discover a new dimension in life. The goal of life is not just to make money but to lead a life in full. Our youth are the torch bearers for next generation, and they must realise their full potential to nourish the society. If the youths around the world get inspired by <strong>Life Sutra</strong>, the purpose of this book is served.</p>
		<p>In this Life Sutra series book, I have taken 108 messages. The number 108 represents divine, victory, glory and complete. May the readers of this book also discover divinity, victory, glory and completeness in this life itself.</p>
		<p>My salutations to my Guru Paramahansa Swami Maheshwaranada ji for initiating me in to the path of Yoga. I bow down to my Indweller Lord Vasudeva by whose Grace these messages dawned in me. I dedicate this book to the all those who are keen to lead celebrate life in its glory.</p>
		<p>My sincere thanks to Shri Bharatheesha P for designing this book beautifully. I extend my gratitude to Prism Books Pvt. Ltd., for publishing my third book.</p>
		<p class="text-right"><strong>Rajendra Damodara Yenkannamoole</strong> <br /> Melbourne, Australia and Bengaluru, India<br /> 25 December 2019<br /> YouTube/fb/twitter/linkedin: vasudevakriyayoga</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>

