<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The MANTRA for Winning Cancer Battle</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d.1">
		<p class="text-center"><strong>DEDICATED TO MY WIFE NALINI, my ‘SAVITRI’</strong></p>
		<p class="text-center">
			<strong><em>A vast intention has brought two souls close</em></strong><br />
			<strong><em>And love and death conspire towards one great end.</em></strong><br />
			<strong><em>For out of danger and pain heaven-bliss shall come,</em></strong><br />
			<strong><em>Time’s unforeseen event, God’s secret plan.</em></strong><br />
			<strong><em>This world was not built with random bricks of Chance,</em></strong><br />
			<strong><em>A blind god is not destiny’s architect;</em></strong><br />
			<strong><em>A conscious power has drawn the plan of life,</em></strong><br />
			<strong><em>There is a meaning in each curve and line.</em></strong><br />
			<strong><em>It is an architecture, high and grand</em></strong><br />
			<strong><em>By many named and nameless masons built</em></strong><br />
			<strong><em>In which unseeing hands obey the Unseen,</em></strong><br />
			<strong><em>And of its master-builders she is one.</em></strong><br />
		</p>
		<p class="text-center"><strong><em>SRI  AUROBINDO in ‘SAVITRI’</em></strong></p>
	</section>
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d.2">
		<p class="text-center"><strong>ANANYA’S FAITH</strong></p>
		<p class="text-center">
			Washed over by dread. He sat in that dreary room<br />
			“What is it Doctor?” Forehead beaded with sweat.<br />
			“Sir, it’s Cancer” he said. The walls closed around him.<br />
			Time seemed to have stopped. “What is to happen now?”He thought.<br />
			He was welcomed home by an array of tears. With people engulfing him with pity and fear, <br />
			For his well being, They offered to pray.<br />
			Unsure of how long he was here to stay. From his loved ones he grew distant.<br />
			Unable to convey, Just how much he missed them.<br />
			Eaten by sadness, he could not display. For the sake of his people,<br />
			Strong he must stay. Each month, was another goodbye,<br />
			Haunted by the thought That, today he may die.<br />
			At the end of it all, He was greeted with sweet relief.<br />
			A result of his perseverance, And constant belief,<br />
			He had won his battle, Succeeded in his fight,<br />
			No matter what complications he’d face,<br />
			He knew his future was bright.
		</p>
		<p class="text-center"><strong>My little darling grand daughter Ananya</strong></p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
