<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The MANTRA for Winning Cancer Battle</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-101.1">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Foreword</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">H</span>.S. Kulkarni, aged 75, an engineer cum executive and entrepreneur of Dharwad, was diagnosed as having Non-Hodgkins Lymphoma Cancer Stage 3-A in August 2011. He races and wins the cancer battle in less than a year, not with just chemotherapy, and taking alternative modality of treatment after remission and for preventive care, but due to sheer fortitude and the power of his mind. I had the occasion to hear his story of winning the battle against cancer at a National Seminar on Management of Cancer held in Bangalore on 22 Sept. 2012, where I delivered the Concluding Address. It is gratifying to know that he has since completed 5 years, being free from cancer, after attaining total remission. </p>
		<p>In his unorthodox style, Kulkarni has written his cancer story in this Book form cataloguing his trials and tribulations before and after being diagnosed as having cancer. He subsequently tells how he underwent the crucial chemotherapy and follow up treatment to manage and win cancer with contributory factors as the ‘Mantra’, while exploring and ultimately finding reliefs from alternative medicines. </p>
		<p>For the transformative journey from a cancer battle winner to guiding others for combating cancer, Kulkarni studied, tested and tried various complementary and alternative medicines in addressing cancer cases. Armed with these alternative modalities of cancer treatment, he has eventually come out with ‘<em>Hopestar Mantra</em>’  for containing and managing cancer. Thus, this Mantra has enabled Kulkarni to provide new hope to the cancer stricken in improvement and recovery.</p>
		<p>Incidentally, among the books or material written on the subject matter by cancer survivors and others, H.S. Kulkarni’s book stands apart as one providing the Mantra for alleviation, relief and winning the cancer battle. I am happy to recommend this book as a good read, and practical guide to every person concerned with or affected by cancer. </p>
		<p class="quote-author"><em>Professor B M Hegde,</em><br />MD, PhD, FRCP (Lond, Edin, Glasg, &amp; Dublin), FACC, FAMS<br /><em>Cardiologist &amp; Former Vice Chancellor, Manipal University.</em></p>
	</section>
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-101.2">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Author’s Last Word First</h1>
		<p class="text-center"><strong>Cancer has been a Blessing in Disguise to Me !</strong></p>
		<p>The cancer that I was diagnosed with, and eventually overcame after treatment, taught me some lessons. For, I went through the trials and tribulations as a cancer patient under conventional or mainstream medicine ; took the critical Chemotherapy treatment, and ultimately attained complete remission. While I suffered silently and helplessly from collateral damage caused by the side effects and after effects of chemotherapy, I experienced the devastating impact of cancer treatment on me physically, mentally and even financially. Then, I did not consider it worthwhile to merely write my experience as a cancer patient in the form of book, just to declare that I won the cancer battle.</p>
		<p>I believe, and I am certain, every cancer patient who has undergone similar treatment modality or other modalities of treatment, comes out of the Hospital with the same feeling and traumatic experience. The question that came up is “Whether cancer treatment can be made tolerable, affordable and less rigorous or probably moderate in terms of acute pain and suffering ?” I had no clue or inkling of such possibility while I was undergoing preventive care for two years after complete remission. However, it is during this crucial period that I found the key contributory factors as the Mantra under conventional medicine for combating and managing cancer. </p>
		<p>In pursuit of this compassionate cause, I came to know of the health benefits of holistic science, and particularly alternative medicine. Accordingly, I decided to try the many known, recommended alternative medicines, including healing foods and herbs on myself. Simultaneously, I reached some of my known cancer affected people to try out these alternatives. When I found the results were encouraging and positive, I came out with a Recipe or Hopestar Mantra for containing and managing cancer. It is the revelation of the ‘Mantras’ under conventional as well as alternative medicine for combating and managing cancer that prompted me to start writing and compiling them in the form of a book. This Book, aptly titled as “The Mantra for Winning the Cancer Battle”, catalogues my experience as Cancer Patient, Cancer Survivor, Cancer Fighter and as Hony. Cancer Guide (HCG) to the cancer affected persons. I must say it has been a turning point in my journey, as cancer patient to cancer survivor and fighter, for helping people contain and manage cancer with this Mantra. Thus, the Cancer I got has been a blessing in disguise to me.</p>
		<p>A word about the Mantra under Alternative Medicines. It is simply called the <em>Hopestar</em> MANTRA, which outlines the steps, the processes and the protocols envisaged therein. This Mantra has been applied, tested and tried on a number of cancer patients with favourable outcome and results. The Hopestar Mantra is described and detailed in Part Two of this Book. </p>
		<p>In having come out with the Mantra for combating and managing cancer, and written this book cum practical guide, I like to share the credit with my friend, philosopher and guide Mr. J.S. Pant. What material I had shown and given to him was a mix of chaff and clean grain ; a mix that had to be nicely segregated for bringing out the book. Without his meticulous editing, suggestions and professional inputs, this book may not have come out in the shape and form it is. In fact, I wanted and earnestly requested Mr. Pant to be a co-author of the book, but he politely declined. I cannot thank him adequately for his enthusiastic involvement and contribution to making this Book possible.</p>
		<p>I thank my friend and colleague Mr. A.P. Kulkarni for putting me in touch with Dr. S.R. Kulkarni of Delhi, who was working on ayurvedic alternatives, and for introducing me to the acknowledged Vaidya Narayan Murthy of Narasipura, whose name is synonymous with specific herbal barks he offers as therapy for various diseases and symptoms. I am grateful to Dr. Shyamsunder Joshi and Dr. Shanta Joshi of Bangalore for sharing with me the versatile health benefits and efficacy of Simarouba herb, which I invariably recommend to the cancer affected. </p>
		<p>To my wife Nalini, who evolved as my Savitri, I am beholden and grateful to her forever for having brought me back from the jaws of death, when I suffered the attack of Herpes resulting from the collateral damage caused by the cancer non- Hodgkins Lymphoma. I am equally thankful to all my Care Givers, from wife Nalini to son-in-law Vijay, daughter Arati, son Raju, daughter in law Madhu ; and my sweet little grand daughters Rhea, Ananya and Tanvi for being with me most of the time and propping me up in my long and arduous journey as a cancer patient to a cancer fighter.</p>
		<p>Finally, for the support and suggestions through the gestation and  publication of this Book, I am grateful to Mr. Pranesh Siravara of  Prism Books Pvt Ltd.</p>
		<p>Akshaya Tritiya Day, 2017<br />Dharwad</p>
		<p class="text-right">H.S. KULKARNI</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
