<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>50 Soul Stories</title>
	<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000e">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Foreword</h1>
		<p>There lived a celebrated Chinese poet called Tao Yuanming during 365-427 AD. A minor official in an obscure district by profession, he thought little of high rank. Once when a senior inspector was on an official tour of the district, the poet’s subordinates advised him to dress up for the occasion and pay the inspector a courtesy call. On hearing this piece of advice he said with a sigh, “I cannot for five packs of rice bow before a country bumpkin and a petty man.” And as the anecdote goes, the same day Tao quit!</p>
		<p>Now, someone may find him silly for valuing his dignity and refusing to do what must strike many of us as the practical thing – everyone does it! But the point is that he did not consider his material well-being more important than his sense of right and wrong.</p>
		<p>The question remains. Ask yourself, <em>Is it worth breaking your back for five packs of rice? </em></p>
		<p>As a matter of fact, simple and fundamental value-laced and normative issues elude most of humanity (most of the time). The sources of the consistent constancy of entrepreneurial concern about the bottom line are not hard to discern. But any serious analysis would restore the value of values, even in business matters. Money as the be-all and end-all is not an optimal strategy even for a businessman. Bereft of values, we would be losers overall, <em>if one takes a larger perspective. </em></p>
		<p>What is success to you? How do you measure yourself with your peers? It is anybody’s guess, that you will admit you would generally equate success with material well-being, if not outright with your level on the ladder of hierarchy. Nor are you likely to regard someone as having done well in life unless he has the usual material emblems to exhibit – car, bungalow, country club membership and a plethora of tags to demonstrate name and fame.</p>
		<p>And the business world is no different. The dictum, <em>No business without show-business </em>is not quite an unpragmatic one<em>. </em>We accept the ladder-climbers as our superiors and do not match relevance to their intellectual integrity or dignity. Thus Truth escapes us. As a sage once said, If we turn our back to the sun, we see mere shadow.</p>
		<p>Success is surely more meaningful than material wellbeing. In fact, material well-being should be the by-product of success, brought about by a strong sense of ethics. Selflessness, consideration for others, honesty and other virtues form the moral foundations of a society. Dignity and pride arise from responsibility and not from authority.</p>
		<p>And likewise, profitability is to be the by-product of the core-values, which provide the glue that holds an organization together through time. As John Young, former CEO, Hewlett-Packard said in 1992, “We distinguish between core values and practices; the core values do not change, but the practices might. We have also remained clear that profit – as important as it is – not why the Hewlett-Packard Company exists; it exists for more fundamental reasons!”</p>
		<p>Values, virtue and wisdom matter a lot in business. It is the intangible and the subtle that create the tangible and the gross. One must develop the third eye to see the gains, which stem from the intangibles – for sure, one cannot see the invisible through the Nelson’s eye. Wisdom is the guiding force behind the core values in practices. “Wisdom without action hath its seat in the mouth, but by means of action it becometh fixed in the heart.” Moid’s book is an attempt to fix wisdom in our hearts.</p>
		<p>Wisdom sometimes comes in unexpected flashes. His parables reflect on lessons taken from compassionate and perceptive managers, honest trade-unionists and gracious CEOs. A human resource professional, as he is, he relates true stories of wise managers – he calls them ‘The sagas of management monks’ – monks who taught him some simple and honest truths in management matters. His parables teach what is not taught at a business school. Seven of these parables were already published by American Society for Training &#38; Development (ASTD) and it is a singular recognition of his effort.</p>
		<p>Moid’s <em>Management Parables </em>have a carry-to-understand flavour. Each parable brings to fore a unique business moral. His management monks are his peers, juniors, directors, CEOs and also trade-union leaders. He breaks myth. His presentation is forthright, honest and transparent. The real value of this work lies in these qualities.</p>
		<p>I have known Moid for some time now. The profileeditor of Economic Times called him a poet-manager. He is the recipient of the Rajiv Gandhi Memorial National Award for Excellent Manager, 1995, and winner of the Best Manager Gold Award, 1996, instituted by International Greenland Society. I fondly remember his earlier work ‘The Brave New Manager’ which was honoured as the best Management book of 1996 by DMA of All India Management Association. I see a spark in him.</p>
		<p>Life is a learning process. One must learn and share his learning with others. Those who know must contribute. If they do not, the guilt is unpardonable. Chanakya puts across appropriately: <em>More harm is caused to society by the inaction of good men than by the misdeeds of evil men. </em></p>
		<p>This book demonstrates the art of unclipping one’s wings and that of scaling new heights.</p>
		<p>I wish Moid the very best in the years to come.</p>
		<p class="text-right"><strong>ABID HUSSAIN </strong><br />Former Indian Ambassador to the USA</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Unless a life is lived for others it is not worthwhile</em></p>
		<p class="quote-author">— Mother Teresa</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>	
