<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>50 Soul Stories</title>
	<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000f">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Preface</h1>
		<p class="text-center"><strong>– A Salute to the Management Monks!</strong></p>
		<p>During the good old days in China, wisdom was considered as the most important and fundamental quality of a ruler. Monks – the spiritual gurus – were expected by the subjects to show the rulers the right path of wisdom when they went astray. The monks used to convey their message of wisdom by writing parables. Unlike Socrates, the monks were never asked to drink hemlock.</p>
		<p>My previous book on Management Parables was published in 1997, wherein I collated the short stories of wisdom from my days serving several Indian public sector companies. These were my true experiences at BHEL, NHPC, CCI, HMT and BEML that ranged from moments of frustrations to some alluring while other fleeting moments of sagacity.</p>
		<p>Many liked these hair-raising parables for I chose to sheaf the wheat from the stalk, by portraying those that illustrated the path of the monks. The book did well I presume, for each chapter was short enough to read and long enough to learn. Fifteen years hence, in April 2012, my associate and friend S Pranesh, Managing Director, Prism Books, suggested that I come up with a fresh book on ‘Soul Stories of Management Monks’ following the technique – <em>writing afresh, yet retaining a few. </em>What you hold in your hands is my compliance to his recipe.</p>
		<p>The vision that I had seen fifteen years ago still remains unfulfilled. I had dreamt of a corporate world where competence is subordinated to core values, core strategies to core purpose, knowledge to wisdom, Learning Organizations to Gracious Organizations, and management gurus to management monks. However, during this time frame not much changed for the better, rather things deteriorated. As years rolled by things have gone from bad to worse. All good things seem to be running in reverse gear and brakes have been lifted from those that were once regarded errant. I doubt if this happening by chance.</p>
		<p>The propagators of this so called new morality are using social engineering actively to modify the face of the society on this wonderful planet. They are looking for a new world order where freedom overtakes transgressing: Where sin is undone not by virtue but by definition, so it does not remain sin anymore and therefore no one can be slandered as a sinner; Where unethical practices are considered honourable. Thus resulting in a society where ‘all is well’ and no one ever goes astray for the structure itself has been reprogrammed. All this is happening under our nose, but like an ostrich many of us choose to burry our heads in the sands and imagine ‘all is well’.</p>
		<p>The greatness of life does not depend on ‘How happy you are’, but on ‘How happy others can be (through you)?’ Corporate world is not an alien, which dwells on another planet; corporate world is the part of same world, which exists in our world. The business principles are not different in both these entities. They cannot and should not be different than the principles for the guidance of humanity. These are age-old chaste principles, which anchor in space and time from time immemorial. I call these the cosmic principles, which not only touch the heart but also stir the soul. Truth travels through hearts, like light travels though space. This book has come out from my heart and I hope it shall kindle your life – both corporate and personal.</p>
		<p>To infuse the freshness into this book a father has taken the assistance of his son, so in a way Feroz Siddiqui, is the invisible co-author of this book, who helped edit my writings to give it a universal flavour.</p>
		<p>Your business <em>shubhchintak </em></p>
		<p class="text-right"><strong>Moid Siddiqui</strong><br />reachus@intellects.biz<br />www.intellects.biz</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>By three methods we may learn wisdom: Firstly by reflection, which is noblest; secondly by imitation, which is easiest; and thirdly by experience, which is the bitterest</em></p>
		<p class="quote-author">— Confucius</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>	

