<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>50 Soul Stories</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-050">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Follow Your Moral Compass</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">W</span>hen Steve Jobs the innovative co-founder of Apple who transformed the personal use of technology (as well as entire industries) with products such as the iPod, iPad, iPhone, the Macintosh computer and the iTunes music store, succumbed to cancer on 5<sup>th</sup> October 2011, his critics predicted that Apple was doomed, that it would die too sooner than later. Less than six months later with the launch of the new iPad on 16 March 2011, its stock more than doubled to cross for the first time; the US$600 per share mark. This makes Apple the world’s most valuable company, with a market capitalisation of nearly US$555 billion.</p>
		<p>Apple Inc is clearly the “Most Admired,” the “Most Innovative,” and the “Master of Design. So what is their iSuccess?</p>
		<p>During an interview when the late Steve Jobs was asked if Apple did any market research before developing it next best iProduct? He replied, “We do no market research. It’s not about pop culture, and it’s not about fooling people, and it’s not about convincing people that they want something they don’t. We figure out what we want. And I think we’re pretty good at having the right discipline to think through whether a lot of other people are going to want it, too. That’s what we get paid to do. So you can’t go out and ask people, do you know, what’s the next big thing?”</p>
		<p>Case in point, back then they figured they all hated those unfriendly Finnish cell phones, next thing we know we have a new product called the iPhone. Then came the iPad mocked by many only to be silenced by the brand new product category that it developed. Today the entire industry is building their versions of iPad, to grab a share of that market created by Apple – rest is history!</p>
		<p>Then there is this great quote by Henry Ford, when he said, ‘If I’d have asked my customers what they wanted, they would have told me ‘A faster horse.”</p>
		<p>So why does Apple the world’s most innovative company scoff at the notion of target markets, and they don’t believe in conducting focus groups or surveys? What is it that companies like Ford can see, which others find opaque? What is so different in such companies’ vision?</p>
		<p>Well, it all starts with the leadership. Management gurus describe leadership in terms of ‘Transactional Leaders’ and ‘Transformational Leaders’. The latter are visionary leaders, who see the future through their mental eye and transform the organization and prepare the people to match the changes they envision.</p>
		<p>To my mind, there are two types of leaders – Those who follow the ‘Crystal ball’ and those who follow their ‘value or moral compass’. While some are good in understanding the future trends and develop their people and products towards that externally driven goal, there are others who develop people and build the organizations such that they are ever ready for the future trends. Such are companies that last long and stay anchored in space and time.</p>
		<p>Those who follow vision along with values learn that the vision illuminates the direction and the values disclose whether the path chosen is righteous! Such leaders are but the Management Monks. The corporate world has grown rich only with the reserves of such exceptional leaders who are in minority yet restrain the world and mankind from going astray, for they use their moral compass at all times.</p>
		<p>In todays corporate world the primary objective of any company is to gain the competitive-edge. This ‘mantra’ is taught in IIMs, MIT and Harvard Business Schools of the world. But Lao Tzu – the Old Master – said more than 2500 years ago:</p>
		<p><em>“Those who do not compete do not meet competition!” </em></p>
		<p>He queries, “Why is the sea king of a hundred stream?” and gives the solution, “for it lies below them!” Lao Tzu further says; “…the <em>humble</em> is the root of the <em>noble</em>; The <em>Low</em> is the foundation of <em>High</em>.”</p>
		<p>On the other hand the old master warns us saying:</p>
		<p><em>Too much success is not an advantage</em></p>
		<p><em>Do not tinkle like jad</em></p>
		<p><em>Or clatter like stone chimes</em></p>
		<p>Then Tao Te Ching expands:</p>
		<p><em>Better stop short than fill to the brim.</em></p>
		<p><em>Over sharpen the blade, and the edge will soon blunt.</em></p>
		<p><em>Amass a store of gold and jade, and no one can protect it.</em></p>
		<p><em>Claim wealth and titles, and disaster will soon follow.</em></p>
		<p><em>Retire when the work is done.</em></p>
		<p><em>This is the way to heaven.</em></p>
		<p>The learning from these pearls of wisdom is clear; Today, we do not need <em>management gurus</em>, to teach you, <em>How to sell the comb to the bald, or ashes to the devil or ice to the Eskimos!</em> We don’t need them any more. Today, we need the <em>management monks</em> who will use their moral compass, not the crystal ball, to impart wisdom and vision so that we can choose the right path.</p>
		<p>Thick dark clouds are hovering over the world, today. Don’t be frightened, for from this darkness shall appear the glow-worms. Don’t be afraid of chaos; use your moral compass to show you the path to success.</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>When the country is confused<br />and in chaos, loyal ministers<br /> appear </em></p>
		<p class="quote-author">– Lao Tzu</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
