<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-001">
		<h1 class="level1-title text-center" epub:type="title">Chapter 1</h1>
		<p>Ron dashed along the sandy track, trying to overtake his speedy friend Josh. An idea formed in his mind, and the boy transformed into a cheetah. He overtook Josh and crossed the finish line first. He sat there, very tired.</p>
		<p>“Cheating! Cheating!” Josh panted as he crossed the line. The cheetah shrugged and changed back into Ron.</p>
		<p>The four friends May, Carra, Ron and Josh were in Imagneus, a planet far from Earth. The four had been normal Earthlings until they met Iris, a Ronen, and joined her race as Ronens, and had all travelled to Imagneus. It was tough though, as their parents agreed to send them with only one parent for each. The Ronens were preparing for a war in Imagneus against an evil Streo called Grinlaut. They won over Grinlaut, and had spent the past two months rebuilding their homeland.</p>
		<p>“That is not cheating,” Avaron, the leader and Iris’ father, said.</p>
		<p>“How come?” Josh asked, surprised.</p>
		<p>“It is part of Ronen to transform. That trait will, of course, be allowed in every competition.”</p>
		<p>“But it didn’t say so in the banner!” Josh protested.</p>
		<p>“That goes without saying,” Avaron smiled.</p>
		<p>The four friends had been transformed into Ronens, and the Clan had accepted them readily.</p>
		<p>Ron was ecstatic. He punched Josh, who wasn’t ready to accept that he had lost a running race for the first time ever in his life.</p>
		<p>Ron grinned and looked up. Satiro, one of the three moons on Imagneus, was out. Quirodon was partly visible, half hidden by clouds. The other came and went as it pleased. There was no telling that Faztex would rise. Faztex was the auspicious blue moon, Quirodon was the lucky silver moon and Satiro was the beautiful red moon. Each moon had its own night- Dusk of Satiro, Dawn of Quirodon, and the Night of Faztex.</p>
		<p>Josh sighed wearily and trudged past other celebrating Ronens to his makeshift bed.</p>
		<p>The Ronens always held ceremonies, functions and parties only on the nights when Faztex rose. They did so because it was said that the Ronens rose to glory from ashes on the Night of Faztex. Ivy and Leif, Iris’ siblings had told the four the story-</p>
		<p>“The leader then was Kortis. He was selected as the leader, and everyone had high hopes; he was young, strong and had a lot of ambition. He strengthened the clan and was a just and kind leader. He was the one who started the tradition of worshipping the moons. He took back the lands that had been stolen from them. One night, he decided to defeat the tyrant king of Imagneus, and he led the Ronens along with other clans to battle on the Night of Faztex. We won, and Kortis himself was chosen as the king of Imagneus. Now the tradition of kings is gone, but still we celebrate the Night of Faztex.”</p>
		<p>Ron reached the bedroom first, and fell on his bed happily. The camp was not yet fully restored, and everyone had to make-do with what they had. Pal, Ron’s bond, climbed onto Ron’s bed and squashed him under his weight. Ron shoved the dog off, and Pal whimpered. Josh made his grand entry and slumped on his bed. Carra and May came in, called out a ‘good night’ and the four were sleeping by the time their parents came in.</p>
		<p>They woke up to Victoria’s morning alarm. Tabitha, Carra’s bond, a cat, mewed a greeting and strolled out, with Carra beside her, with Ron and Pal following. May waved to them from where she and her bond were helping May’s mother to cook. Josh was left in his bed, sleeping.</p>
		<p>The friends joined Iris and her sisters at the table, where the Ronens were serving breakfast. Ruben, a magnificent hawk, also Iris’ bond, flew over and sat down beside them.</p>
		<p>“Where is Josh?” Ivy asked.</p>
		<p>“Snoring,” Tabitha mewed, yawning.</p>
		<p>“She asked ‘where is he’, not ‘what’s he doing’,” Ron pointed out.</p>
		<p>“He’s snoring in Jupiter. Happy?” Tabitha twitched her tail, irritated.</p>
		<p>When they were washing the plates after breakfast, Josh dashed over. “What’d I miss?” He panted.</p>
		<p>“Most important meal of the day,” May said. “There’s some left I think. Go eat quickly.” He raced off, leaving clouds of dust trailing behind him.</p>
		<p>The four met later on, with Iris, and decided to go for a walk. No sooner had they set foot out of the camp, that they heard Romial, the deputy, call May and Ron. The two quickly muttered their farewell and ran away with their bonds.</p>
		<p>Iris, Carra and Josh strolled around the camp, wondering what to do, when suddenly, a horrifying screech caused them to look up. A three-legged beast with a monstrous face and short wings was hovering in the air, clutching a young boy, who was wailing desperately. He had white feathery wings, which were cruelly tied up. The creature let go of the boy, and he fell straight amidst the massing Ronens.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>The plan would work perfectly. The Shadow of Death watched the events unfold on his magical waterfall with unpleasant happiness. The shimmering water on the waterfall showed his trusted captain, Gillsor, dropping the winged boy into the Ronen Clan. He let out an evil chuckle. He watched with avid interest as an eagle (or was it a hawk?) grab the boy and lay him gently on the ground. The scarred face of the Shadow twisted into a hideous smile. His animal-like yellow eyes glittered hungrily, desiring a power only the Ronens could hand him.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>The winged boy was waking up. He groaned, then bolted up straight, fully alert. Two score Ronens stood watching him suspiciously. Three Ronens were standing near his bed. One was gazing at him curiously, inspecting his hand, which was mysteriously glowing faintly. The boy pulled his hand away. The other two were checking a list and muttering something.</p>
		<p>“Herbulen, step aside,” a tall man strode forward, gently shoving the doctor aside. “What’s your name?” He asked.</p>
		<p>“Fivlon,” the boy said. “Harra boschon,” the boy said. He muttered something else inaudible, and his eyes welled up with tears. He furled and unfurled his wings, and then let it lay limp at his sides.</p>
		<p>The tall man looked at him, and then said, “Leave him for now. Apparently, he doesn’t know English.”</p>
		<p>He posted two guards outside the room, and left with the others. The boy looked at the closed door, and smiled cunningly. How easy it was to fool them! Of course he knew the language! Why, hadn’t he been the one to endure years of suffering by following them to Earth and noting their every move? <em>No time to waste</em>, he thought, and pulled out a small disk from his wings. His wings were the latest edition which came with extra large storage.</p>
		<p>There were a number of dials on the disk. He pressed them in a pattern, and it started turning slowly. It clicked once, twice, and then a beam of light fell on it. It turned faster and faster, enlarging as it spun, until it was the size of a basket. Then it stopped, and the light flickered and was gone. The disk glowed with the same light his hand had glowed with. The Shadow of Death’s face appeared, cruel and menacing as usual. The Shadow smiled, and the boy knew the Death Lord was pleased with him.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
