<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-004">
		<h1 class="level1-title text-center" epub:type="title">Chapter 4</h1>
		<p>They all stared, dumbfounded, as the hazy shape of the black bird vanished into the night. The moon glowed dully as they trudged the last few kilometres to the hotel.</p>
		<p>They sat outside, on a bench. Amy sighed wearily.</p>
		<p>“What do we do now? The car’s wrecked,” Josh said unhappily.</p>
		<p>“I don’t know, kids.” Amy sighed again.</p>
		<p>“Where exactly did Avaron say the lotus was?” Zevyn asked.</p>
		<p>“He said it was in a dangerous forest, right? In an underground cave or something.” Iris said.</p>
		<p>“Where do you think that would be?” May asked.</p>
		<p>“I know some caves around Switzerland,” Josh said.</p>
		<p>“I don’t think it’s there,” Snowflake said quietly.</p>
		<p>“Maybe....umm... how about in Mexico?”</p>
		<p>“Doubt it.”</p>
		<p>“Africa?”</p>
		<p>“Maybe.”</p>
		<p>“We could try out in some historical site, don’t you think?” Iris asked.</p>
		<p>“Yeah. Which is the most historical place, do you know, Mrs. Anderson?” Ron asked Amy.</p>
		<p>“India!” Ruben suddenly cried out.</p>
		<p>“What?” Iris asked her bond, confused.</p>
		<p>Ruben stared blankly at Iris, even more dazed than the girl. “What did I just say?” he asked, blinking.</p>
		<p>“You just said ‘India’,” Pal explained.</p>
		<p>“I have never even heard of it. It just kind of flashed in my mind.”</p>
		<p>“Like someone mind-messaged you?” Josh asked, laughing.</p>
		<p>Ruben nodded. “Seriously? I was joking!” Josh cried.</p>
		<p>“India <em>does</em> have a good history. It was really rich in culture,” Carra’s mother said.</p>
		<p>“Maybe we could try there.” Pal suggested.</p>
		<p>“Yeah, only thing is how can you get there?” Tabitha asked.</p>
		<p>“I have a good friend in the airlines. I could ask her to give us a lift.” Amy said, fishing out her mobile phone from her purse.</p>
		<p>Lyke and Zevyn had been watching this exchange with interest.</p>
		<p>“Where <em>is</em> India?”Lyke asked. “India is across the ocean, in the southern part of Asia,” Josh replied promptly. Josh always had a good memory when it came to Geography.</p>
		<p>Carra’s mother dialled her friend. They spoke for a few moments, and then Amy cut the call.</p>
		<p>“She said she’ll be delighted to have us,” Amy said with a sparkle in her eyes.</p>
		<p>Very soon, they were at a private landing site, waiting with their luggage, which was pretty much stuff which they had just bought.</p>
		<p>A blue and white plane gracefully landed in front of them. The door opened and a young woman popped out. She waved to them. She was tan and had a head of brown curls. Amy embraced her, and told her not to freak out if the animals talk. But she adjusted quickly, and didn’t lose her nerve for a second.</p>
		<p>“Well, get in! What are you waiting for?” the young woman called, grinning. The children and animals climbed aboard and sat comfortably. There was enough space in the back for Ruben to sit at ease, without his wings getting cramped.</p>
		<p>The plane rolled down the runway, with Jemma, Amy’s friend, called out instructions in the headset.</p>
		<p>“Please fasten your seat belts! We are about to take off!” she called cheerfully.</p>
		<p>Zevyn stared at the mechanism. She listened carefully as Josh and Carra explained how the plane works. Lykenzar gazed out the window, lost in his own thoughts. The animals played a game which they just invented. May, Ron and Iris joined them. Amy called Ron’s father and Josh’s mother to inform them that they were going to India. She filled the other two parents about everything that happened.</p>
		<p>“Where are we going exactly, Jemma?” May asked.</p>
		<p>“Delhi, the capital of India,” the pilot called back.</p>
		<p>May nodded and focused her attention back on the game.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>“I hope they got the message,” Avaron fretted.</p>
		<p>“They would have, don’t worry.” His wife sat down next to him.</p>
		<p>“So, they know where to go, don’t they?” Ivy asked. She was with her family, pacing back and forth restlessly. Avaron nodded.</p>
		<p>“Sit down, Ivy. They are fine, as you can see for yourself,” Leif said. Ivy nodded absently and sat down heavily.</p>
		<p>Minkin tore his gaze from his crystals. He and Jasper had set it up, the crystals forming a border to a pool of water. He blessed it, and a vivid scene of all of the children formed in the water.</p>
		<p>Avaron had sent a mind message to them, and hopefully, he thought, one of them would have received it and relayed it to the others. But, something the pilot said was wrong. He couldn’t find out what it was. He frowned, gazing at the crystals harder.</p>
		<p>“What is it? What is wrong?” Raptor, Avaron’s wife’s bond, asked.</p>
		<p>“That Jemma. She said something. I cannot put my finger on it.” He bit his lip. After a moment of intense thinking, he sighed.</p>
		<p>“You will get to know, don’t worry,” Victoria said. “And when you do, it will not be too late for you to change their course.”</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
