<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-006">
		<h1 class="level1-title text-center" epub:type="title">Chapter 6</h1>
		<p>“<em>That </em>was a horrible flight!” Lyke groaned.</p>
		<p>“Totally agree,” Josh said. They had arrived in the city of Bangalore, and were in a taxi cab to civilization.</p>
		<p>They arrived soon, and the greedy taxi driver demanded his money. Amy quickly gave him the taxi fare and climbed off. The taxi sped away into the distance, leaving a gust of wind and dust swirling around them.</p>
		<p>Ron coughed. “What a (cough) meano!” he exclaimed, waving the dust away from him with his hand.</p>
		<p>“Come on, we’re wasting time!” May urged, pulling their luggage and Snowflake’s cage behind her. The flight and police authorities had insisted on keeping the rabbit, Pete, Ruben and Tabitha in a cage and Pal on a leash at all times. But as soon as they arrived, Iris let Ruben free. He immediately took to his blue haven.</p>
		<p>“Where do we go now?” Ron asked.</p>
		<p>“Let’s go get a hotel first. Then we’ll see about the lotus,” Amy insisted.</p>
		<p>“Where’s a hotel?” Ron demanded.</p>
		<p>“We can ask that driver of that weird thing, maybe,” Carra suggested, looking pointedly at a man standing beside an auto rickshaw.</p>
		<p>“Hmm.”</p>
		<p>The group crossed the road and stood in front of the driver. He looked up from the newspaper he was reading.</p>
		<p>“Can you please tell us the way to the nearest hotel where we can stay?” Amy asked politely.</p>
		<p>The auto driver said something incomprehensible to the group.</p>
		<p>“Excuse me?”</p>
		<p>Suddenly, Zevyn said something to the auto driver in another language and he replied. Everybody stared at her except Lykenzar, who puffed out his chest with pride.</p>
		<p>“She has the gift of tongues,” he said importantly.</p>
		<p>“Why didn’t you use it before?” May asked curiously.</p>
		<p>“Well, I don’t know it all the time. When I need it, it just flashes and I know the language by-heart.”</p>
		<p>“What did he say?” Iris asked.</p>
		<p>“We have to go a bit down this road, take the right next to a medical shop, and on the left side, one house before the road ends, is the hotel,” she said.</p>
		<p>They followed her instructions and came to a hotel. Carra’s mother eyed it critically. Then she shrugged and led the way in.</p>
		<p>Zevyn quickly spoke with the manager, and handed over a room key to Amy. But before they could go, the manager said something else. Zevyn clarified it, and turned to her friends.</p>
		<p>“Sorry, guys,” she held her hands up apologetically. “No animals allowed here.”</p>
		<p>Carra groaned.</p>
		<p>“Then where do we keep them?” Iris demanded.</p>
		<p>The manager walked up to them. Speaking in broken English, he said that they could leave the animals in the pet shop opposite the hotel.</p>
		<p>Amy thanked him, and hustled the group out of the hotel. The children followed grudgingly; none of them were happy at the thought of being separated from their bonds.</p>
		<p>They made their farewells short, and returned to the hotel quickly.</p>
		<p>The next morning, the group checked out, and quickly collected the animals. They purchased a map from a local store and stood on the side of the narrow street to study it.</p>
		<p>“Hmm. We’re... here, I think,” Carra’s mother mused.</p>
		<p>“Maybe we should check out a library to see the most historical places here,” Lyke suggested. Pal grunted softly in agreement. As if his barks had summoned them, two stray dogs shot out of their places from under a car and stood menacingly in front of Pal, snarling. Pal stared back, confused.</p>
		<p>“We’d better go,” Zevyn said uncertainly. Amy nodded, and the group set off swiftly, Ron glancing back now and then to see if the dogs were still pursuing his bond. Thankfully, they left them when they rounded the corner of the street. Lyke and Zevyn glanced at each other in puzzlement.</p>
		<p>“Let’s keep moving,” Iris said with a worried glance behind her back.</p>
		<p>Carra’s mother nodded, and led the group away. They paused briefly to check the map again, and made their way to the nearest library.</p>
		<p>They left Lykenzar, Ron and Iris outside with the animals. Once inside, they asked the librarian for historical books. She showed them and walked back to her desk, smiling at them.</p>
		<p>The group rooted out every possible book which had a possibility of giving them their answer. After a strenuous hour of searching, May finally triumphantly shouted out, “I’ve got it!”</p>
		<p>The others immediately bunched around her. “See?” she said pointing out the page. “It’s right there. Hampi,” she said. The others nodded. Zevyn took the book from May and read it out loud.</p>
		<p>Amy nodded when she finished. “You’re right. We should go there as soon as possible.”</p>
		<p>Suddenly, her phone rang. She picked it up, and talked quickly. When she cut the call, she looked very excited.</p>
		<p>“What is it?” Carra asked her mother.</p>
		<p>“Ron’s dad just called. He’s here it seems. He left Jessica in Josh’s house. He has a very close friend in Bangalore, and we can stay there for the night, and tomorrow, we can all leave for Hampi.”</p>
		<p>They placed all the books back as soon as they could, and thanking the librarian, they shuffled out. They told the others the news.</p>
		<p>“Cool!” Ron said, apparently amazed at how fast news travelled. Lykenzar nodded approvingly, while Iris resorted to talking excitedly to Ruben.</p>
		<p>Ron’s dad picked them up from a hotel. As they drove, they filled him in on other details.</p>
		<p>The journey to the neighbourhood of Ron’s dad’s friend was one hour. The car was an eight-seater; but still there wasn’t enough space for all of them. Ruben and Pete flew overhead, while the others were still congested. Ron’s father drove, Carra’s mother sat in the passenger seat with Tabitha. Behind them, the children were stuffed with the luggage.</p>
		<p>They stopped many times to readjust themselves with the luggage, and it took them a little over three hours to reach their destination.</p>
		<p>Finally, the car pulled over in front of a big house. An aging man, around 50 years old at guess, opened the front door and rushed out to meet them.</p>
		<p>“Ajay!” Ron’s dad called, waving as he pulled out a small suitcase.</p>
		<p>“Max!” he shouted back, his Indian accent sounding slightly strange to the friends.</p>
		<p>Max quickly introduced all of them to each other.</p>
		<p>“Ajay was my colleague before he retired. He is a close friend of mine,” he explained. Turning to his friend, he asked, “Are you sure you don’t mind us staying?”</p>
		<p>“No, no, not at all,” he chuckled. “You are all welcome. The animals too, though Kamala will probably want to cover the furniture before they come in.” Grinning broadly, he led them inside.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
