<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-008">
		<h1 class="level1-title text-center" epub:type="title">Chapter 8</h1>
		<p>“Try this. It is my wife’s specialty,” Ajay invited. It was dinner time, and they were eyeing the table hungrily. Ajay’s servant had taken the animals outside for their dinner. He had bought food for all of them.</p>
		<p>The animals had not talked since they entered the house, not wanting to give the old couple a fright.</p>
		<p>After they had arrived at the house, Iris had received a vision; the same one as her father had dreamt, though this was unknown to her. She was backed against an invisible wall, and a blur threatened her life. She couldn’t identify it, but she had a doubt that it was the Shadow. She had tried to fight him, but ended up having a decayed hand when she tried to fight off the blur.</p>
		<p>Iris had freaked out then, and it took her a long time to recover. She was sure that her family was in trouble, and she almost stormed out of the house to search for the lotus on her own. It took all of them to restrain her. She had calmed down eventually, but the vision still haunted her.</p>
		<p>At the moment, she was very grave at the dinner table, refusing to speak to anyone but Ruben. The Indian couple didn’t understand her resolution, but they didn’t press her. Instead, the kind hearted duo tried to distract her by giving delicious dishes for her to try. Slowly, she shook off her misery and enjoyed dinner.</p>
		<p>Ajay and his wife gave them three guest rooms. Kamala seemed a little hesitant to let the animals sleep inside, but Ajay persuaded her until she agreed. They ate their dessert- an ice cream which their servant had hurriedly purchased- and were soon snoring in their rooms.</p>
		<p>They had woken up early the next morning to find that Kamala had prepared a feast for them to eat then, and also for the journey to Hampi. Ajay even offered them to take his car, seeing that they barely had enough space for everyone.</p>
		<p>They agreed, and the two adults sat behind the wheel and they were off.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>Ruben suddenly started screeching and clawed at the window next to him. It was mid-day, and they were on a lonely highway.</p>
		<p>The others in the same car looked at Ruben in shock. The usually calm hawk was suddenly acting like his life depended on getting out of the car. Iris reached out and slid open the window and her bond flew out in a rush of feathers.</p>
		<p>They all peered out the window. Ruben flew up and collided with an incoming bullet speed of black.</p>
		<p>“What’s going on?” Carra’s mother, who was driving, halted the car. Behind them, Max’s car also squealed to a stop.</p>
		<p>Iris opened the car door and jumped out. The others crowded around her. They squinted upwards, trying to see what was going on against the sun’s bright rays.</p>
		<p>Shrill shrieks echoed around as the battle waged on. With a last screech, the black smudge accepted defeat and half flew, half fell to the earth. Ruben followed, clawing the falling bird one last time. Just before it landed, Ruben snatched it in his strong grip and laid it almost gently on the ground. The others all rushed to see.</p>
		<p>As they got a better look at what Ruben had attacked, Zevyn gasped. “It’s the same bird which pushed the minivan in Scotland!”</p>
		<p>Ruben nodded.</p>
		<p>“You just saved our lives!” Tabitha exclaimed.</p>
		<p>Iris hugged her bond. “It was probably going to knock us off again.”</p>
		<p>May leaned closer to the bird’s face. Slowly, in agony, it opened its eyes.</p>
		<p>“Why did you try to attack us <em>again</em>? You promised!” Carra hissed.</p>
		<p>“Why didn’t you just give up?” Snowflake snarled.</p>
		<p>The bird just groaned and let its head fall.</p>
		<p>Lyke gasped. “Is it dead?”</p>
		<p>“No,” Ruben growled. “She is a crafty one. She is just trying to trick us. Again.”</p>
		<p>“She?”</p>
		<p>“The Death Lord sent her. She said he wanted us dead, and that she was the best assassin,” he explained.</p>
		<p>“Yeah right. Ruben would have made a better assassin, if he ever had the heart to even take up such an offer,” Josh snorted.</p>
		<p>“Should we treat her?” Ron asked cautiously. Pal looked at him exasperatedly.</p>
		<p>“Better kill her. But, we aren’t so cruel. Why don’t we just give her to a zoo? After all, where has one seen such a bird?”</p>
		<p>The others looked at the limp bird. It was true. She was big, very big, with red eyes. The tips of her tail and wings were white, while her claws were an unexpected pale brown. Her neck had rings of white, and her beak was spotted.</p>
		<p>“That’s a good idea. She’d be better off in captivity,” Max agreed. The bird squawked in surprise.</p>
		<p>Ruben looked at the others in contempt. The bird realized her mistake and pretended to act dead again.</p>
		<p>“So much for playing dead.” Josh sneered. He resisted the urge to kick her, and instead hefted her over his shoulder by a wing. She let out a whimper of pain. Lyke held another wing, while Ron provided support for her scarred claws. Together, the three boys carried the huge bird to one of the cars, where Max immediately tied her up with bits of rope he found.</p>
		<p>“Now all we need is a zoo,” he announced.</p>
		<p>After about half an hour, they were face to face with a nearby zoo’s veterinarian, who had immediately asked his assistant to take custody of the bird. He had marvelled at the intricate patterns in the rings of white on its neck, but decided to examine it later, once she was treated.</p>
		<p>Amy and Max spoke to the vet; they had left the children and the animals in the cars.</p>
		<p>They cast one last glance at the bird. She had looked back at them pitifully, but they glared at her coldly. She dropped her head, losing all hope.</p>
		<p>They were on the road once more. A few kilometres away from the zoo, they stopped to clean a bloody Ruben up. He stood still as they dabbed paper dripping with water around his neck. He was pretty badly wounded, but he had fared much better than his adversary.</p>
		<p>Finally, when they had cleaned him up, they proceeded with their journey. Ruben was still wet, and Tabitha refused to sit next to him no matter what. Pal ended up next to Ruben, and the dog revelled in the hawk’s dampness, enjoying the moisture seeping into his fur.</p>
		<p>They stopped for lunch in a highway hotel. The animals were left staring wistfully at their bonds as the children and the adults went inside the restaurant. After they finished their lunch, they bought a parcel meal for their bonds and waited as the animals wolfed down their lunch.</p>
		<p>They drove again, halting for a break a couple of hours after lunch to stretch their legs/paws/wings.</p>
		<p>They set out again. The children stared at the lonely highway, and a pang of homesickness hit them. Ruben and Pete flew out, relishing the feeling of wind in their feathers. Pal peeped out of the window, panting in the face of the breeze. Tabitha and snowflake curled up together, while the children played games in their separate cars.</p>
		<p>It grew darker, and the children got bored of their games. They decided to try to communicate through the cars. But it started raining, and they abandoned that hope. Ruben and Pete rushed back to the cars. The light rain turned into a wild storm, and they were forced to pull over. They parked side by side, and the children told horror tales.</p>
		<p>Thunder roared ahead, and only the momentary lightning showed the surroundings. The two adults tried to locate where exactly they were, but there was no signal, and the battery of their torches had died out.</p>
		<p>They distributed shawls and jackets to keep warm against the growing chill.</p>
		<p>The animals huddled against the children to keep them warm, but it didn’t block out all the cold. The children shivered as they tried to fall asleep.</p>
		<p>The thudding of rain on the car roof top kept Pal awake. So he was the only one to realize that there was mist spreading around the cars, and strange lights flickering amidst the fog.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
