<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-010">
		<h1 class="level1-title text-center" epub:type="title">Chapter 10</h1>
		<p>“What in the world <em>is</em> that?” the children had woken with Pal’s repeated barking, and were astonished to see the mist clouding around them. Strange lights-blue, green and red-were glowing mysteriously in the midst of the fog. Ron’s father had offered to check it out, but none of the others agreed.</p>
		<p>“What do we do?” Snowflake asked.</p>
		<p>Ron shrugged, shivering. Ruben also offered to check out the lights.</p>
		<p>“What if they are not dangerous? I will not take long, I promise. Besides, what is the harm in just looking around quickly? We can go together.” He argued, motioning to Max. The adult had agreed, and grudgingly, Iris allowed her bond to venture outside.</p>
		<p>Ruben crept outside, immediately vanishing behind the haze. He flew close to one of the lights, which was flickering eerily. Ron’s father was right next to the hawk, bending down to inspect it.</p>
		<p>The light blinked at him, and disappeared, in its place, a little piece of folded up paper. The two looked at each other, and made their way back to the two cars. Once inside, they opened the paper, and found spidery writing all over the page.</p>
		<p><em>Dear Lotus seekers,</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>I am the guardian of the Lotus. Kindly give up all attempts to gain the Lotus from my grasp, for it will be fruitless. But, however, if you do persist, there may be a certain way to achieve your mission, though it will be dangerous, and I highly recommend you give up now. If you fail that mission, I assure you your journey will end in Heaven (or Hell). But if you finish it, then maybe I can compromise something. But beware; this will be by far the toughest mission you would have ever faced. The mission</em></p>
		<p>“There are some stains after that. I can’t make out anything else.” Max said sadly.</p>
		<p>The others looked downcast, none of them making a sound. Pal was the first to break the silence.</p>
		<p>“How did that thing, whatever it is, actually find out who we are, and what we are looking for?” he asked, looking frightened and bewildered. The others shrugged.</p>
		<p>“What if it’s spying on us?” Pete asked.</p>
		<p>“How can it? We’ve never seen it.” Josh said.</p>
		<p>Tabitha nodded. “The only one we’ve actually seen is the crow, whatever thing. And she’s been taken care of.”</p>
		<p>“Maybe it is hiding in the fog?” Iris suggested.</p>
		<p>“But how can it mindread us?” Zevyn argued.</p>
		<p>“You have the gift of tongues, don’t you?” Carra asked her suddenly.</p>
		<p>“Yes, but I can’t sense stuff,” Zevyn retorted.</p>
		<p>“What about you Lyke? Do you have any special powers or anything?” Ron asked hopefully. He shook his head. “Only Zevyn,” he confirmed.</p>
		<p>It seemed as if everyone who was present there drooped, all hopes of figuring out what the strange warning meant was burnt.</p>
		<p>“Hey!” May said, suddenly shooting straight up. “Hi,” Pal said automatically, but then regretted it as everyone glared at him.</p>
		<p>“Well, what is it?” Amy prompted.</p>
		<p>“You got that paper when you touched the light, didn’t you?” Max and Ron nodded.</p>
		<p>“Maybe, if you get more papers, we can find out what this means!” she said, jiggling around in excitement. The others looked at each other happily.</p>
		<p>“Great thinking, May!” Carra’s mother patted her.</p>
		<p>“Awesome idea. We’ll go now,” Max announced, looking over at Ruben, who was ruffling up his feathers. The hawk nodded, and the two exited the car in a flash.</p>
		<p>They came back soon, each bearing at least two papers each. All had the same spidery handwriting, but a different message.</p>
		<p><em>Dear Lotus Seekers,</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>It is better if you end this goose chase now. If you don’t, here’s a riddle for you to solve. Decode it, and I will grant you permission to move on.</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>AN ARROW WILL GUIDE YOU TO A SHRINE</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>THE SHRINE OF STONE HAS A FERRY FINE</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>SET SAIL ON IT SLOWLY AND YOU WILL FIND</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>MAYBE, IT’S NOT JUST A TRICK OF THE MIND.</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Have fun with the riddle. But always keep in mind that this hunt is much more dangerous than you think. </em></p>
		<p><em>The Guardian.</em></p>
		<p>“The rhyme makes no sense!” May protested when they finished reading the first riddle.</p>
		<p>Max shrugged. “There’s nothing to do other than follow it.”</p>
		<p>“Read the second one,” Snowflake suggested. They turned to the next scroll. The second one didn’t waste ink on greetings. It jumped straight to the point.</p>
		<p><em>So, you’re puzzled by my little rhyme. Read this one, and maybe things will get a little clearer.</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>STARRY SKIES GRIEVE, LAMENT AND CRY</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>WHILE YOU ENTER THE LAGOON; GO ON, DON’T BE SHY</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>DOWN THE STEPS- 273 YOU GO AND STAND BY</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>REACH A CRANNY, SAY, AND SHOUT HI!</em></p>
		<p>“What? This is more confusing than the last!” Tabitha cried.</p>
		<p>“We’d better read all. Then maybe we can get a hang of things.” Amy said, slightly worried.</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Well, if you’re still confused, why not give this rhyme a go? </em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>SHOUT IF YOU MUST, TO GET YOUR BEARINGS</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>BUT SHOUT LOUD, I’M HARD OF HEARING</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>LOOK TO THE SKY, BUT DON’T TRY STARING,</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>AN ARROW WILL APPEAR TO SEE HOW YOU’RE FARING!</em></p>
		<p>“Is that the arrow mentioned in the first riddle?” Iris asked. Zevyn nodded. “Could be.”</p>
		<p>Ruben handed the last scroll to Ron’s dad.</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Try and figure this out. I think you are getting somewhere. But this is a warning, the rhymes as you read were not in order. Please try keep up. </em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>IT’S GETTING WET, AND COLD AND DARK</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>EVERYTHING SAID SEEMS LIKE AN ECHOING BARK</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>DON’T BE TERRIFIED, IT’S NOT A SHARK,</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>BUT BE AFRAID, IT’S NOT AS GENTLE AS A LARK.</em></p>
		<p>“This is getting really confusing,” Pete muttered, resting on Pal. “Maybe, the third one we read is the first,” Pal ventured. Pete shot up straight. “You’re right!” he squawked. “And the first one we read is the second, and then we have to set sail, right? So we’ll end up in water-”</p>
		<p>“And then go into a lagoon and everything becomes cold and wet, and there’s something dangerous over there, but not as dangerous as a shark!” Tabitha continued excitedly.</p>
		<p>“We have to try that,” Lyke said. The others murmured their agreement.</p>
		<p>“But where exactly is that water? And a stone with a ferry? What does that mean?”</p>
		<p>“I guess we’re supposed to find a huge stone with a ferry inside it.”</p>
		<p>“We’d better just get there; we’ll see what we can do later.”</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
