<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-011">
		<h1 class="level1-title text-center" epub:type="title">Chapter 11</h1>
		<p>“I am so bored,” Ron grumbled.</p>
		<p>“But we were just playing!” Iris protested.</p>
		<p>The group were still on the journey to Hampi. It was the day after they had found the scrolls. Earlier that morning, they had taken the advice of the rhyme and shouted loudly to the Guardian, then looked at the sky for any sign of the arrow. Finally, after almost half an hour of searching the sky for the arrow, they realized that it wasn’t even an arrow, it was the name of the place they had to get to; it was written ‘Hampi’ clearly, formed by the clouds.</p>
		<p>“I’m hungry,” Pal whined. “You always are,” Snowflake sniffed.</p>
		<p>“But I am too!” Ron joined in. Max shot his son a glare before handing over a rucksack of food to the boy. Ron’s eyes gleamed as he scouted through the contents of the bag.</p>
		<p>They feasted on the sandwiches they had brought. Finally, after another couple of hours of driving, they reached the city of Hampi.</p>
		<p>“Now for a hotel,” Amy announced. They drove through the old village, stopping in front of a good-looking hotel. The adults entered, leaving the children and the animals in the cars. Inside, they asked the clerk about the major attractions of Hampi. He handed them a booklet, explaining rapidly.</p>
		<p>Thanking him, they exited the hotel with the booklet and climbed into their cars. Once they reached a spot where nobody would see them, they all gathered together.</p>
		<p>“The riddle is about a shrine. It’s given in this that the stone chariot here,” Carra’s mother pointed to its picture on the booklet, “was built as a shrine for a god. It’s made of stone, as given, and is the only one which is relatively close to a ferry, because it’s a chariot.”</p>
		<p>“That’s awesome!” Josh cried out, his eyes shining.</p>
		<p>“We’re nearly there!” Lyke agreed, slapping his sister a hi-five.</p>
		<p>“Let’s get this show on the road,” Tabitha mewed, lifting her paws impatiently. They set off, driving to the stone chariot.</p>
		<p>When they reached, they jumped out of the cars, vying with each other to be the first to land. Ruben shook his feathers and shot into the sky like a rocket, Pete following more slowly. Pal bounded out excitedly, with Ron chasing him to put on a leash. Iris scooped up Snowflake, before joining the others.</p>
		<p>They looked around in awe. The buildings were intricately carved; there were horses, elephants, soldiers, kings, slaves, dancers and many more decorating the walls of the Vittala temple next to the stone chariot. They gazed at the architecture in admiration, forgetting about the rhymes for a moment. They came out of their trance when a dog nearby started howling.</p>
		<p>Pal whipped his head around. A young boy was throwing stones at a black and tan dog. Pal growled, but Ron held him back. Before the group could scold the boy, the dog gave a low menacing bark before turning away. A local guide marched up to the boy and dragged him away by the ear. The boy whimpered in pain, but knew better than to scream in public.</p>
		<p>“Serves him right.” Pal muttered. Lyke nodded, and they made their way to the stone chariot.</p>
		<p>“You know, I think it’s better if we return at midnight. What can we do with everybody here?” Zevyn murmured. Max agreed, and led the group away. They waited in the cars until the moon was up, shining brightly, and stealthily re-entered the temple grounds.</p>
		<p>The moon was almost full, casting a bright glow on the chariot. They tip-toed around to the back of the chariot and started inspecting it.</p>
		<p>“What are we even supposed to be looking for?” May asked.</p>
		<p>“A ferry? Or something like that, I guess,” Zevyn shrugged. Carra’s mother nodded.</p>
		<p>“But there is no ferry or a boat on this,” Ruben said, puzzled.</p>
		<p>“What if it’s on the inside?” Ron asked.</p>
		<p>“Inside?”</p>
		<p>“You know, up that ladder thingy out front, inside this temple thing.”</p>
		<p>“Worth a try, I suppose.”</p>
		<p>Pete flew inside, and searched the interior. The children climbed in, and started searching beside the parrot. Ron tried to go to the back of the shrine, but tripped over Josh who was trying to go out. Ron fell down, and grabbed a piece of rock which was poking out, to save himself from falling inside a hole which somehow just appeared. He screamed. Lyke grabbed his hand and pulled him away.</p>
		<p>“Thank you!” he breathed, and screamed again.</p>
		<p>“I’ve got to hand it to you, bro, you may be stupid, but you are clever!” Josh said, patting Ron’s back.</p>
		<p>“But that doesn’t make sense!” Carra argued.</p>
		<p>“I don’t care.” Josh shrugged. They jumped out, and told those waiting outside of the events. Max hugged his son.</p>
		<p>“I think we are supposed to go inside that hole. Maybe the ferry is waiting over there.” Iris murmured.</p>
		<p>They climbed into the chariot.</p>
		<p>“One of us should go there first and check it out,” Pete said.</p>
		<p>“I will go,” Ruben volunteered. Before his bond could protest, he added, “If there is danger, I can just fly out. It would be harder for you.”</p>
		<p>Reluctantly Iris agreed, and Ruben swooped down silently, clutching a flashlight in his talons.</p>
		<p>From above, they could see only the dancing pattern of the flashlight beam. Soon, Ruben appeared at the edge of the opening.</p>
		<p>“It is safe,” he reported.</p>
		<p>“How far is it?” Zevyn asked.</p>
		<p>“There’s a ladder about a metre from the edge. At the bottom, there is a very small strip of land. Do not get down there. When you are on the last rung of the ladder, jump to the left, backwards. It is solid ground there,” he cautioned.</p>
		<p>Max went first. Right above, Lyke climbed down, followed by his sister, who was guiding Tabitha down. Ruben led them, offering advice. When Max reached the last rung, the hawk helped him, guiding him with his wing tips. Tabitha, on Zevyn’s back, nimbly jumped down.</p>
		<p>Snowflake was right behind the cat, carried by May. Josh and Ron together managed to just keep Pal from falling. The golden retriever got stuck in the middle though, and Ruben, with Lyke’s help, managed to carry the dog to safety. Ron and Josh descended quickly after that. Carra and her mother were last, with Pete bringing the rear. Above them, the hole closed as suddenly as it had opened.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
