<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-016">
		<h1 class="level1-title text-center" epub:type="title">Chapter 16</h1>
		<p>“Is this stuff <em>edible?</em>” Zevyn frowned at the brown fruit she held in her hands. “It looks like it could kill you,” Josh agreed. Amy shrugged and threw it away. Iris followed her action.</p>
		<p>“Mom!” Carra called from further inland. Amy turned her attention on her daughter. Carra was pointing at something in the floor. It was an intricately carved stone slab. A little pushing revealed a key under it.</p>
		<p>“Now what the hell is this for?” Josh muttered, picking it up. It was silver, with bits of red and green and blue stones. Tabitha suddenly let out a gasp of surprise. There was a drawing in the stone slab, one which showed the key in a door made of blue gems.</p>
		<p>“Now that’s surprising,” Amy commented. Pete sat on the carving, studying it closely. “There’s somebody with an elephant head here. Looks familiar.”</p>
		<p>“That’s a Hindu god!” Amy exclaimed, brushing Pete off the slab. He flew off, squawking indignantly. She called Max, who had taken Ron, Pal, Lyke, May and Snowflake to forage for more supplies. He came instantly, the rest of his group crowding behind him.</p>
		<p>She showed him the slab and the key. “There are carvings of some Hindu gods too. I studied Indian legends when I was younger. There’s Ganapati, and that one’s Hanuman. That’s Krishna, Vishnu and Shiva. And that one, which is holding the instrument, is Saraswati.” She turned the slab over, which revealed a lot more figures.</p>
		<p>“It shows a door. Where could that be?” Ruben asked thoughtfully. “It’s probably in a temple. Some ancient one from around,” Snowflake suggested. “Why?” Pal asked, shaking out his fur for no reason. “There are god’s carvings here.” Snowflake nodded at the stone slab. “I think it’s pretty obvious that gods are found in temples, so probably the door’s there as well.”</p>
		<p>“That’s a good observation,” Max noted. May smiled at her bond, and Violet chattered, prancing around like a monkey.</p>
		<p>“Where do you think a temple would be over here? And who would have constructed it?” Lyke wondered. “The same people who made the opening in Hampi, and the same people who probably built that ship.”</p>
		<p>As Josh said that, everyone remembered those events. It seemed like a lifetime ago to them.</p>
		<p>“So now to find this temple and the door, then the lotus and get back to Imagneus,” Iris announced. “What about food?” Ron’s stomach grumbled.</p>
		<p>“Fine, food first, temple later.” After finding some edible fruits, they went back to the temple carving, in case they’d missed a clue. They found a small engraving on the other side of the slab. It showed an ‘Om’ symbol next to a huge banyan tree, with a lake on the other side.</p>
		<p>“I guess that ‘Om’ represents the temple, and it’s next to a banyan tree, which is next to a lake.” Zevyn squinted at the slab. “Let’s go!”</p>
		<p>They set off, Ruben and Pete scouting ahead for any sign of the lake. They soon glided down to join the group. “We can see it up ahead,” Pete reported. “Just follow us.”</p>
		<p>Soon, they reached the shore of a big, crystal clear lake, which had an island in the middle. Ruben and Pete flew off to find the banyan tree, while the rest decided to sit down and chat. A swoosh of wings announced the arrival of the two birds.</p>
		<p>“The banyan tree and the temple are on the island. We saw both of them,” Pete reported. “How do we cross the lake?” Ron asked, looking at the expanse of water that separated them from the temple. Ruben shook his head. “There does not seem to be any kind of bridge as far as I can see.”</p>
		<p>“Can you check again?”</p>
		<p>Pete and Ruben rose into the air once more, gliding high above. They landed next to the others after some time.</p>
		<p>“There’s a fallen tree,” Pete said. “It looks slippery. You will have to cross carefully.” They followed the two birds to the tree. It was a tall oak tree. The bark was withering, and the water lapped at its bottom. Max decided to go first, and inched along the tree trunk, almost falling over twice. As he neared the end, he grasped the branches for support, and made it across safely. May followed, with Snowflake at her heels. Pretty soon, everyone had made it across, except for Pal, who had fallen over in the middle and was now swimming towards the island.</p>
		<p>Before Pal even reached the shore, everybody went to the temple, not wanting to get drenched by one of his fur-shakes. They found the temple pretty quick. It was made of stone and had ivy vines growing along the sides with moss at the base. It had engravings all around which had withered away, but they could make out a very large ‘Om’ symbol at the very front.</p>
		<p>The door was a huge slab of stone with a tiny keyhole in the centre. Fishing out the key from his pocket, Max slid it into the hole and turned. A click indicated that the door was unlocked, and it swung open on rusty hinges.</p>
		<p>“Do we go inside?” Zevyn asked, glancing eagerly at the cobweb filled doorway of the temple. Max nodded, and led the way inside, grabbing the torchlight from his bag and switching it on. A loud roar stopped them in their tracks.</p>
		<p>“Thunder!” Amy called from outside. Ron let out a loud sigh of relief. The patter of rain started, which turned into a storm in no time at all. The sound of the raindrops on the temple walls sounded eerie from inside, seeming to magnify itself when it echoed through the walls.</p>
		<p>Iris suddenly stopped, frozen to her spot, staring at a sideway, causing Carra to bump into her. “Hey, what’s wrong? Move-” her words froze on her tongue as she saw what Iris was looking at.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
