<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-018">
		<h1 class="level1-title text-center" epub:type="title">Chapter 18</h1>
		<p>“Congratulationsss.”</p>
		<p>The serpent emerged out of thin air.</p>
		<p>“The lotus! This is the one!” Iris exclaimed, her eyes lighting up. The snake’s face contorted into a weird smirk. “You figured it out, I sssssee.”</p>
		<p>“Come on! We have to get back now!” Pete called, spreading his wings, ready to take flight.</p>
		<p>“Not ssso fassst, birdie,” the snake hissed, amusement in its tone. “What do you mean?” Ron cried.</p>
		<p>“You’re the guardian,” Max realized. “The guardian of the lotus.”</p>
		<p>“Well done. You realizzzed.”</p>
		<p>“Let us go! The Ronens will die if we don’t get there in time!”</p>
		<p>“And when, exactly, isss ‘in time’?”</p>
		<p>“What the hell? We have to go back <em>now</em> or the Shadow guy will kill everyone!”</p>
		<p>“But I never sssaid that I will let you go asss sssoon ass you get the lotusss.”</p>
		<p>“You tricked us!”</p>
		<p>“Fraud!”</p>
		<p>“Me? I never promised anything,” the snake mocked innocently. Iris glared fiercely at the Lotus Guardian.</p>
		<p>“Oh, I’ve had enough of this!” Zevyn spat and marched forward, her blade in hand. She catapulted into the air, and, holding her blade forward, drove it into the snake. Or at least, that’s what she expected to happen. Instead, while she was still in the air, the blade disintegrated into sand. Zevyn was so surprised she lost balance but managed to land on her feet in front of the serpent. The other weapons had become miniature sand dunes as well.</p>
		<p>“Hey, umm, Lotus?” Ron raised his hand as if to ask a question. The snake turned its piercing eyes on Ron. “Umm, I can call you Lotus, right? ‘Cause Gaurdian of the Lotus is such a long name?” he said, more like a question. The serpent was staring at the boy in shock.</p>
		<p>“He’s distracting it! Iris, Lyke, Zevyn, Ruben, you get back to Imagneus as fast as you can. We’ll try to follow. Save the Ronens!” Max whispered urgently. The Lotus Guardian’s gaze was still locked on Ron.</p>
		<p>“NO! The Lotus Guardian or Guardian of the Lotus is and always will be my name. You have no right to tamper with such an honourable name,” it hissed angrily.</p>
		<p>“Oh! I’m so s-sorry, Lotus Guardian. But d-do you mind if I ask a few questions?” Ron stammered. “Go on,” the snake said with a nod of its head. All the while, Ruben, Iris, Lyke and Zevyn were slowly inching towards the entrance.</p>
		<p>“Ummm, so yeah, like, what’s your real name? I mean, you got your name when you were hired right?”</p>
		<p>“Hired?”</p>
		<p>“Yeah, like when you signed up for this job. You didn’t start guarding the lotus as soon as you were born right?”</p>
		<p>“You mean you want my life history?” The snake gazed at Ron with hopeful eyes.</p>
		<p>“Umm, yeah, something like that if you don’t mind.”</p>
		<p>The snake let out a hiss of delight, and curled up comfortably, wrapping its tail around itself. With its back to the entrance of the room, it didn’t notice the disappearance of two girls, a boy and a hawk.</p>
		<p>“Settle down, boy. It’s a long story.”</p>
		<p>“And it’s a long night, isn’t it?” Max muttered, standing next to his son.</p>
		<p>“Is it night? I thought it was afternoon,” Josh grumbled. They all sat down.</p>
		<p>“I was born as the runt of the batch,” the snake started melodramatically. May raised an eyebrow, and Josh rolled his eyes. “My siblings bullied me, and my mother didn’t stop them. I fought back of course, but they were bigger, and they would try and put me in place. My mother abandoned me soon, and left me to survive on my own.” The serpent paused for a breath.</p>
		<p>“But I learnt the trickeries of the world and survived on my own. I became stronger everyday and learnt to give what I had to survive. There was this time when a fox tried to eat me. Hah! It got a nasty surprise. It underestimated me, like everyone else.” The Lotus Guardian put on a scowl.</p>
		<p>Everyone blocked out the drone of the snake’s voice as it rambled on about its twisted life. After re-accounting about two score incidents, the Guardian finally got to the point where it became the Guardian.</p>
		<p>“And the previous Guardian gave me the post with those exact words.” Ron yawned loudly. Josh’s head slumped on Pal, and Carra blinked repeatedly to fight off her drowsiness. The snake hissed at them, irritated.</p>
		<p>“Whoa! I’m awake, I’m awake,” Ron held up his hands. Only Josh snored on, undeterred. The Lotus Guardian narrowed its eyes at the sleeping boy.</p>
		<p>“Hey, um, Lotus Guardian, I forgot your real name again,” Snowflake said immediately. The snake turned its head. Amy flashed the rabbit a grateful glance before fiercely waking Josh up.</p>
		<p>“My name, as I told you three times already, is-”</p>
		<p>The serpent was interrupted by Josh’s yawn, which equalled the sound of a flight taking off.</p>
		<p>“Enjoyed your dream?” It asked Josh sarcastically. “Oh, yeah.” Josh nodded. “Are you going to let us go now?” Pete asked. The Lotus Guardian glared at him with its fiery gaze.</p>
		<p>“No.”</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
