<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000b.1">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Publisher’s Note</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">W</span>e are happy to place the book of Prof. K. B. Ramakrishna Rao in the hands of the interested public. We thank Smt. K. R. Vijayalakshmi, daughter of Prof. Rao for her passion to preserve the manuscript for more than 30 years and for her permission to publish the book. Her enthusiasm for arranging to publish her father`s book is to be specially appreciated and recorded.</p>
	</section>
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000b.2">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Acknowledgements</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">P</span>rofessor Juan Mascaró, who is well known to the world for his English translations of the Bhagavad Gita, the Upanishads and the Dhammapada, and who is devoted to Lord Krishna<a id="_idIndexMarker000"></a>, took kindly to my writings. When I requested him to contribute a Preface to my work, he did so with all love, and so inspiringly. I may not deserve what he has said of me. I leave it to Lord Krishna to make me deserve what he has said of me. My grateful thanks are due to him.</p>
		<p>I should not forget to mention the help that I received from my daughter Ch. Vijayalakshmi in preparing the Index. May her devotion to Lord Krishna<a id="_idIndexMarker001"></a> increase!</p>
		<p>How should I thank the Lord Himself who made me His instrument to give expression to what has been said here? I have nothing but a sense of fulfillment that I have served Him in my small way.</p>
		<p class="text-right"><strong>K.B. Ramakrishna Rao </strong><br />Mysore University<br />Manasagangotri<br />Mysore 570 006</p>
		<p>6<sup>th</sup> May 1984<br />(<em>Visakha Suddha Panchami</em>)</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
