<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d.1">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">preface</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">I</span>am extremely happy to write this note about my father’s book entitled <em>Bhagavad Gita: The Philosophy of Loka&#173;saṃgraha or Cosmic Consolidation</em>. Today (23-12-2016) is the most memorable day for me as my revered father`s book is being released on this date and month, which happens to be his birthday (23-12-1925).</p>
		<p>My father saw beauty in everything. He set an example to the saying, “God is beauty and beauty is God.” He was an artist, poet, painter, sculptor and philosopher, all blended in one person. Lastly, he was my friend, philosopher and guide.</p>
		<p>The present book was very dear to his heart. It was delivered as a series of lectures in the divine presence of Sri Satya Sai Baba at Whitefield, Bangalore, in May 1973. When Prof. Rao was alive he tried to get it published, but owing to the publishers’ lethargy, the book never saw the light of day. He died on 14-12-1988.</p>
		<p>The present work could see the light of day owing to the help rendered by Sri Suresh Babu, Chandrasekhara Babu, Prof. Narayana Moorty, Prof Juan Mascaró and many others.</p>
		<p>Sri Suresh Babu and Chandrasekhara Babu are not only family friends of Dr. Ramakrishna Rao, but also the followers of U.G. Krishnamurti, (U.G). U.G. used to spend some days with Prof. Rao during his visits to India. U.G. had seen the manuscript and was of the opinion that it should be published soon. Sri Suresh Babu, out of his love and affection for his uncle Prof. Rao, had resolved, along with Chandrasekhara Babu, that the book should be published. Thereafter, Prof. Narayana Moorty, who taught philosophy in the U.S., helped us by editing the book.</p>
		<p>Prof. Juan Mascaró, a professor at Cambridge University, has written an appropriate preface to the book. My grateful thanks to all of them.</p>
		<p>My grateful thanks also go to my dear husband Sri Shanmugasundaram and beloved daughter Kumari Harshini and Prof V.N. Sheshagiri Rao for their co-operation in publishing the book. Finally, I thank the great Almighty God who stood solidly behind the publication.</p>
		<p> I hope the readers will receive the book with interest. Suggestions and improvements, if any, shall be incorporated in the next edition of the book.</p>
		<p class="text-right"><strong>K.R.Vijayalakshmi</strong></p>
		<p class="text-right">115,Gangothri,<br />2<sup>nd</sup> stag, 4<sup>th</sup> cross, <br />Saraswathipuram, <br />Mysore 570 009 (India)</p>
		<p class="text-right">Phone (land): 0821–2543902 <br />(mobile): 09164914209</p>
	</section>
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d.2">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Foreword</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">T</span>HE SONG of the Bhagavad Gita is the Song of the Universe, and the Spirit of the Universe speaks to our soul in this Song.</p>
		<p>In the struggle of man for light, Arjuna, the symbol for man, feels his weakness, confusion and despair, and implores his friend, who is God: “Be a light unto me. I come to thee in supplication.’’</p>
		<p>If any man goes in supplication to the Spirit of the Bhagavad Gita, with his life as his faith and with his love as his joy, the Spirit of the great Song will gradually lead him on the path of the mountain of the Highest and he will be able to say, like Arjuna to his God: “By thy grace I remember my light, and now gone is my delusion. My doubts are no more, my faith is firm; and now I can say, thy will be done.”</p>
		<p>The verses of the Bhagavad Gita can be a fire to burn the dross of our life, and a light in our darkness leading us to a greater joy in remembering those words of light and fire and share their joy with others: <em>bodhayantaḥ parasparaṃ</em>.</p>
		<p>Professor Ramakrishna Rao is a University Professor of Indian Philosophy, a thinker and a scholar. He offers his work at the feet of Krishna, and in this act of adoration he shows that he is more than a scholar and a thinker. He is a lover of the Spirit of the Bhagavad Gita. Scholars and thinkers think of the Gita in time, but Professor Rao sees the Gita in Eternity. This leads him to take a single word of the Song <em>‘lokasaṃgraha’</em>, where the word <em>loka</em> becomes for him the ALL of the universe, and <em>saṃgraha</em> becomes the communion of the finite with the Infinite, in all our moments of life.</p>
		<p>By throwing a new light on the word <em>lokasaṃgraha</em> he throws more light on the whole of the Bhagavad Gita. He sees that the great Song is a Song of life, and sees the sublime oneness of the Song. He thus can say that the Sāṃkhya of the Gita is not an analysis of the many, but a knowledge of the One; and sees the light of <em>jñāna</em>, the love of <em>bhakti</em> and the life of <em>karma</em> are three in one, three inseparable parts of the one spiritual body: a light which is also love and life, a love which is life and light, and a life which is light and love. He sees life as a <em>yajña</em>, a sacrifice and a dedication, and considers true life to be a <em>yoga</em> with the Infinite.</p>
		<p>Professor Rao gives a symbolical, and therefore, a spiritual interpretation of ‘the path of light and darkness’ in chapter eight of the Gita, suggesting that transmigration of life takes place in one’s mind, here and now on this earth. This leads us to consider that every moment of our life is a new life and an old death. We die in a past that is gone and we live in a future to come, and thus our life on this earth is a perpetual transmigration.</p>
		<p>In many of Professor Rao’s ideas on the Bhagavad Gita we find the seeds of what must be the spiritual life of man in times to come. It will be a new life based not on books or on words, but based on the greater life of those who are in true harmony with the Song of the Universe.</p>
		<p class="text-right"><strong>Juan Mascaró</strong></p>
		<p class="text-right">Comberton <br />Cambridge, U.K. <br />May 1984</p>
	</section>
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d.3">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">The Theme in the Vedic Perspective</h1>
		<p class="verse">Being ignorant, I inquire of the Sages<br />
			who know (the Truth). For the sake of gaining (the knowledge, <br />I beseech): <br />
		What is that One, the Unborn, which alone has held these six spheres? </p>
		<p class="text-right"><em>Ṛg. Veda</em>, 1.164.6</p>
		<p class="verse">I ask you:<br />
			What is the outermost end of the universe? Where is its navel? <br />
			What is the fecundating power of the rain-shedding steed? <br />
		What is the transcendent source of all expression.</p>
		<p class="text-right"><em>Ṛg. Veda</em>, 1.164.34</p>
		<p class="verse">Sages declare:<br />
			That alone is <em>Ṛta</em> (the Law of Being). <br />
			That alone is <em>Satya</em> (the Law of Truth). <br />
			That alone is the Transcendent Brahman of the sages.<br />
			That alone is the act of worship, and even social service.<br />
		That alone is the navel of the Universe, and sustains all being which has been and which will be.</p>
		<p class="text-right"><em>Mahā Nārāyaṇa Upanishad</em>, 1.6</p>
		<p class="verse">None can reason out the Infinite and the mystery of its Being, neither its transcending heights nor its horizontal extension, nor its central dynamics.<br />
		Its name could just be Great Glory, and none can limit it by any definition. </p>
		<p class="text-right"><em>Mahā Nārāyaṇa Upanishad</em>, 1.10</p>
		<p class="verse">Its being is only to be intuited,<br />(its dynamics) to be envisioned, <br />and (the glory of its Being) <br />authentically participated.</p>
		<p class="text-right"><em>Bhagavad Gita</em>, 9.54</p>
	</section>
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d.4">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">A Few Words</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">T</span>his is an attempt to understand the message of Lord Krishna from an angle of one who considers Himself Reality, and how He means to organise His being. It is a cosmic orientation – not individual – which corrects naturally the individual estimates of Reality, but cosmic truth, which does not nullify the individual; instead, it restores his position of dignity and value in a cosmic theme and consolidation. </p>
		<p>If one can call the present attempt an ‘interpretation’, it rests upon understanding Reality as a self-consolidating principle, infinite in dimensions and being. The attempt takes its cue from the happy expression found in the Bhagavad Gita viz. <em>‘loka-saṃgraha’</em>, and expands its meaning beyond the individual, social, ethical or broadly, human reference, treating it only as an element of the larger cosmic theme. In this sense, <em>‘loka-saṃgraha’</em>, beyond its generally restricted use, is cosmic consolidation referring to the whole range of being. The Lord, who puts forth the philosophy of cosmic consolidation, presents a perspective which is exactly the reverse of what any individual may have of Reality. It is Reality looking at us, and estimating us! </p>
		<p>When the Lord touches upon the highest levels of truth, He calls it ‘transcendental dialectics’ (<em>paraṃ</em> <em>bhāva</em>), and guards it with a mystic secrecy by making use of phrases found, perhaps, nowhere else except in the Gita – phrases such as <em>ātma-māyā</em>, <em>ātma-yoga</em>, <em>yoga</em> <em>māyā</em>, <em>ātma-vibhūti</em>. It is in understanding these that great caution is needed, and no literal or prosaic translation will help us until we know by intuitively feeling the pulse of the transcendental dialectics.</p>
		<p>Then, the demand is categorical to know the dialectics of cosmic consolidation. One has to participate in the dynamics of Reality, not as a participant from outside, but as the very being that is consolidating! Naturally, the Lord, who projects this perspective, orients our means and methods with certain qualifications, and effects a transformation of them, so that, in accordance with it, even the concept of fulfillment or consummation gets a toning so real and relieving! Under its benignity, even the sunken is lifted and the depraved redeemed, not just the one who is devoted!</p>
		<p>Absorbed in the being (which is here called ‘dialectics’) of the Cosmic Truth, an individual finds himself to be a working centre of the Infinite, consolidating value and purpose beyond his immediate range. This perspective alleviates the individual from the limitations of relativism and presents him as a moment or occasion of the eternal being, which he is. How one is himself and simultaneously all other things in the continuity of eternity and infinity of existence is the mystic secret the Lord initiates us into. This is linking us with infinity and making us feel our bonds with the farthest of existents which had been and yet to be in an inalienable theme of relationship and consolidation.</p>
		<p>It may be submitted in this connection that more than anything, Lord Krishna projects a philosophy that a man would like to present, but a philosophy that Reality itself presents. The recognition of this unique position of Krishna identified with the very Reality speaking to us will perhaps alter all our estimates of what is contained in the Gita. We are invited here to receive the verdict of Reality on our rights, claims, positions and ambitions. These very often foster a false personality and may set ourselves as anti-forces, as parallel existents against Reality or Truth itself. The vision the Lord presents has always <em>the undertone of a cosmic evaluation</em> of a particular instance or action, and His judgments of matter, mind and spirit, of feeling, thought and will, of religion, ethics and philosophy are always pitched high, and if we miss the illuminations of His analysis, perhaps we continue to tread the path that we have been treading, unmindful of the inner calls for a rethinking. </p>
		<p>This humble essay, which is a free exposition of the philosophy of cosmic consolidation, is offered at the feet of the great Lord Krishna, who through the Divine Song has opened for us the vistas of universal or cosmic life and being, and has thrown a spectrum of bliss filling across. There is nothing here that the author claims as his own, except that he has tried to understand the deeper dialectics of the Infinite Being that sustains him both within and without. And if a sympathetic reaction is found around him with regard to his efforts, he is extremely grateful to the very dialectics that have set it in motion.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>The scheme of this attempt is to present at first this cosmic perspective in the form of a free exposition – a long meditation, as it were, in sixteen sections – followed by a translation of the relevant portions of the text of the Gita, which bear out the exposition. </p>
		<p class="text-right"><strong>K. B. Ramakrishna Rao</strong></p>
		<p class="verse"><em>Offered at the feet of Lord Krishna<br />Who through the divine song<br />has initiated us into the<br />extremely secret Spiritual Science<br />and has opened for us the vistas of<br />Universal or Cosmic life and being<br />through a spectrum of Bliss filling across.</em></p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
