<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-001">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">1</span>‘Cosmic Consolidation’ – The Theme In Perspective</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">O</span>ne of the deepest insights into the nature of Reality, and incidentally, one which gives life its deepest significance as participation in Reality, is found in the Bhagavad Gita. The most highly respected of the Hindu scriptures, next only to the Upanishads, it also happens to be the word of the most highly loved of the divine incarnations, viz. Lord Krishna. For a comprehensive philosophic vision, and also for the most personal and intimate pursuits of religion, the <em>Song Celestial</em> gives so much scope that even as non-Hindus find therein the most universal elements of metaphysical, ethical and social values to be respected and adopted, the Hindus find in it their supreme spiritual ideal and the way of realisation enunciated in clear terms. Even as its dignity and charm of the noblest type capture the hearts of the devotees, the text presents a hope of salvation even to the lowest in life, let alone the glory of bliss it promises to the highly sincere and devoted.</p>
		<p>Thinking minds all over the world – both Eastern and Western – scholars and saints, have considered it a privilege to find their intuitions and experiences corroborated therein, and so, are inspired to expound, comment and translate the work. With its universal appeal, the Hindu scripture has found its way into all parts of the world and into the major languages spoken around. The text has been one of the truest and most broad-based expositions of Hindu culture laying bare the secret of universal relationship that man has with another, with the Nature around, and with the deeper Principle within, which, at the same time, is the Principle of Objectivity outside. </p>
		<p>In a wide sweep of problems that face man – individual and social, ethical and spiritual – an insight is given into the psychological bases for functions or malfunctions, and a cautious evaluation is made linking the overt actions or behavior with the hidden stream of Consciousness. And going further deep, the human problem or situation is linked with the none-too-different forces of objectivity, Nature or Cosmos. The Lord, as no ordinary philosopher may do, links up the whole sphere of life with the wider and deeper sinews of reality, and shows how every element which has come up in life has a meaning and purpose, and shows that nothing is unworthy essentially. </p>
		<p>Here is found one of the most fascinating and appealing factors of the text, viz. its catholicity towards the touchy aspects of religious and philosophical pursuits held sacred and inviolable. Where narrow ideas of sanctity attached to individual religious pursuits endanger the values of life, the Lord recognizes each for its merit or value in bringing the different pursuants to the same end, viz. a cosmic relationship. Equally fascinating is the vision of the text giving dignity and a sense of privilege to all occupations within the human milieu by investing each a purpose and value both for the individual and for the community. </p>
		<p>But the greatest insight of the text is to be discovered in its intention to metamorphose each individual effort, struggle, success and failure into a cosmic one. It is a transformation which, if properly intuited, makes life the most worthy to be lived. Putting it in another way, it may be said that the most meaningful aspect of its teaching is its insistence that a human being participates in the dynamics of Reality. It is not enough, if one intuits what Reality is. He should see and authentically participate in its being (Gita, 11.54). It is a conscious and understanding participation, but not an unconscious mute following, which is expected of each man. Because, herein lies the distinction of the human being from the other creatures and things – sentient and insentient – which do partake of Reality, but only as raw material constituting the dynamics of Reality. What enriches or makes life sublime is such a participation, which otherwise would be a wasted episode or material like those of animals and insentient beings.</p>
		<p>Activity, dynamism, consciousness, and purposefulness – these constitute the very elements of a significant life and take us nearer to Reality, or bring Reality nearer to us. In other words, they characterise Reality. And hence, the eternal being or existence of Reality implies a fact of basic consolidation and conservation of all elements conscious and unconscious, static or dynamic, subtle and gross, finite and infinite. It is the whole of Reality revealed as consolidating itself as Infinity thus.</p>
		<p>Can we rise up to grasp this from an obvious position of relativity and finitude? If so, the life we live is worth living. It is worth living from two angles: We are roused to a sense of essential relationship with the Infinite in our actual life, and in our fulfillment of our individual obligations we are made to discover that we play a part in the secret consolidation of the cosmic purpose taking place. A realisation of this ‘dialectic of cosmic consolidation’ through anything that operates within the orbit of the Infinite contributes to an awakening in us of a sense of an essential unity of being over against the relative polarity we normally live in an unawakened life. The most crucial aspect of the teaching of the Gita is to convey this secret of Reality, viz. the finite of our ordinary understanding <em>is</em> the Infinite, fully and totally.</p>
		<p>If, on the other hand, one is not up to this expectation, and says that he is, or can only be, an isolated part or an aspect of Reality, it is the purpose of the Gita to make him aware that he cannot live for a second withdrawn from Reality. For what is within and without him <em>is</em> Reality. There is no withdrawal from it physical or vital. He has only the liberty of feeling free mentally, and this only to the extent of making his life adjusted to the rest of Reality. Therein lies his freedom, and serving it is his liberty. An individual, against his own wishes to escape, is made to realize that he is an inseparable aspect or part of Reality and is being sustained, nourished and propelled by the inner dialectics of all beings, viz. consolidation and conservation operating at the individual centre of action. This is an aspect of cosmic consolidation being effected at the individual level whether he knows it or not.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-001">1</a></sup> </p>
		<p>Reality conceived in terms of cosmic consolidation has two sides:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>the picture of the Cosmos as witness at the point of the individual unfolding itself as a unique moment or occasion, shaping and reshaping as a fuller and fuller personality (morally, socially, intellectually and spiritually),</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>and Cosmos whose sphere of influence as not stopping simply at the isolated moment or occasion called the ‘individual’, but also being the ‘trans-individual,’ i.e., cosmic.</em></p>
		<p>As per this vision, an individual man or woman becomes a point or an instance of the whole humanity working towards a consolidation, and in him is to be seen the measure or the extent of consolidation achieved. It is an instance where the ideal, realisation and being coincide, the coincidence itself indicating the way Reality is revealing itself to us in its infinite unthwarted existence. This is the ‘<em>sat’</em> aspect of reality.</p>
		<p>This is the picture of the Cosmos as a whole gaining in its meaning for us in the process of assimilation as the illumined and evolved centres or moments. (i.e. conscious beings) function and consolidate. As these centres go on, the Cosmos as a whole puts up conditions of growth and evolution for the creatures moving and unmoving to exist and function, thereby illumining the unthwarted existence with light and joy. This is the <em>cit</em> and <em>ānanda</em> aspect of reality.</p>
		<p>This vision of the Truth both as Reality and process<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-000">2</a></sup>  is presented by the <em>Song Celestial</em> and is discernible only when we have the gestalt of the text.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
