<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-001">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">2</span>‘Loka-Saṃgraha’  – The Key Term</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">T</span>he cue for the philosophy of the Bhagavad Gita is concealed behind a most significant expression which is used only twice in the text, but which sums up the whole perspective not only of the philosophy of the Gita but of Reality as such, namely, <em>loka-saṃgraha </em>(3.20,25). There is yet another significant term, which stands for the same, if divested of the narrow colourings put upon it, and that is, <em>dharma-saṃgraha </em>which the Lord terms <em>dharma-saṃsthāpana </em>(4.8). If taken in its widest sense against the background of the philosophy of the text itself and of the personality who says he has incarnated to achieve it, it is not simply overcoming the dissipating forces of irreligion and immorality and stabilizing righteousness of a certain people of a certain kingdom at a given time, but has behind it the very basic truth of consolidating the more fundamental truth, viz. universal order, harmony and growth, transcending the limits of relative grievances and feelings, misunderstandings as well as understandings, customs, practices and even their laxities, linking all these with the larger sinews of Reality operating outside and around human living and extending into the possibilities of all existence. Dharma is not only <em>Ṛta</em>, but also <em>Satya</em>. It is Order and Reality. And how are we to understand the dynamics of it in its being and continuance as being, i.e. in its eternality, other than by the most apt expression <em>loka-saṃgraha</em>?</p>
		<p>The present endeavour is a humble effort to grasp the inner meaning of the dialectics of <em>loka-saṃgraha </em>or <em>dharma-saṃgraha</em> as Reality and process, or as ideal and technique, and also to understand the application of these meanings in terms of the Bhagavad Gita, an understanding which makes a difference in the use of the terms. There is a uniqueness in the perspective of the Gita behind the use of these terms, and it will become clear that a division or difference in the meaning of ‘Reality’ and ‘process’ or ‘idea’ and ‘technique’ does not exist in reality as envisaged by the Lord. To put it plainly, they are not different. But for purposes of understanding only – and standing at the relative level – we may make use of them only to be dropped later, and better it would be even for understanding, if their differences are dropped at every level. </p>
		<p>As Reality <em>loka-saṃgraha</em> is not different from the very being of the Lord who gives it the boldest and loftiest expression in his embodied life and action as Krishna. There is an identification of <em>loka-saṃgraha</em> and Krishna as Reality, and so understanding the one is understanding the other. If the term <em>saṃgraha</em> is taken as an act or process, it is such a process which helps us to understand what Reality is. And if the compound word <em>loka-saṃgraha</em> is taken as a verb, it stands for the act or process. But taken as a noun it stands for Reality in its dynamic being. However, we should not forget that this process is not <em>in</em> time or space, as it refers to the absolute condition of Reality <em>as</em> Infinity, and the Infinity of the Hindu conception is not a process in time or space. All time and space derive their dynamics and existence from the being of Reality as Infinity. Whatever ontological significance <em>we</em> have as individuals in Reality, time and space or time-space just have. They come up as elements within Reality, and <em>their main function is to link up individuals with Reality</em>. They refer not to themselves but turn their eyes to Infinity (see 7.7). The divisions that they may create are instances where they have <em>not</em> functioned, or when they have functioned, they have done contrarily. That is, they have set up themselves as realities, whereby they have separated us from Infinity. The broken image of Infinity and Reality they project on us cuts us asunder to give us a false sense of independence, but only awaiting ultimate absorption as waste material by the Infinite.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-003">3</a></sup> </p>
		<p>If this much is a digression, it is necessary, for it helps us to understand the intuitions of the Gita in identifying the technique with the ideal in <em>loka-saṃgraha</em>. In the context of process <em>in</em> time, the meaning of the techniques or paths of realisation is evident to us. Take for example, the techniques we name: <em>karma</em>, <em>jñāna</em>, <em>bhakti</em> – and there could be more like <em>vairāgya</em>, <em>dāna</em>, <em>tapas</em>, <em>yajña</em>, <em>ahiṃsā</em>, <em>satya</em> <em>etc</em>. – which are related to individual centres called psycho-physical beings. But there is an angle of understanding Reality not through these techniques operating in time, but of them as aspects of Reality in the same sense as time and space are aspects. In other words, there is an invitation here to check the meaning of a ‘path’ or ‘technique’ or ‘mode’ in the set-up of Reality <em>not as leading to it</em>, <em>but as constitutive of it</em>. Making it clear: if they are paths or techniques leading to it, i.e. the discovery of Reality, they must be by implication not the Reality, or the Reality is not manifest while the technique is on. This obviously is an irksome position, and one may be actually getting on with it without knowing it! We are invited to consider a re-orientation of the meaning of a technique or endeavour existing <em>not outside of Reality but within it</em>. This is the estimation of the value of a technique in so far as it seeks a fulfillment and gets itself validated <em>functioning as Reality</em>.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-002">4</a></sup> </p>
		<p>Does this amount to a radical change in viewing a technique as Reality? If so, that is the sense which brings it nearer to the truth of Reality or <em>loka-saṃgraha</em> consolidating itself. Reality is a self-consolidating Truth, in the sense that it does not allow itself to be its opposite and does not work against its own being, and so points to a being whose dialectics is plainly that of consolidation. It is a self-creative or regenerative ‘sacrifice’ (<em>yajña</em>), but not a suicidal movement. It is Infinity never becoming its opposite. In its comprehensive, indivisible and eternal dimension, it rises above the dichotomies of our individual conception or perception. And so, any description of a process of Reality sadly misses the unitive character of Infinity, which Reality is. And at any point of what we mistakenly call a ‘process’, it is the whole of Infinity that comes up, but missing its dimensions we call it ‘finite’ – a finite thing or a moment – and link such things or moments in a series calling it a ‘process’ or ‘continuity’. Reality cannot become unreality, and unreality Reality (2.16). Infinite being or Infinity cannot go against its own Law of Infinity and become a finite thing. If we could intuit this nature of the consolidation of Being, we would catch the indivisibility of the Infinite Reality and come face to face with it as a whole at any moment, and each moment would be significant in so far as each is an occasion of universal or total consolidation.</p>
		<p>Viewed against the background of this understanding, any form of <em>sādhana</em> gets a living freshness in keeping with the structure of Infinity that is Reality, for it goes on ever gathering a moment of <em>meaning</em> within the being of Reality, not realizing something else but itself as Reality. The freshness of this approach is that it reduces to nil the hierarchy of pursuits religious, on the one hand, ‘paths’ (such as<em> jñana, bhakti, karma,</em> etc.<em>)</em> on the other, as superior or inferior, and overcomes prejudices regarding them. The present attempt is an exercise in presenting this perspective, and the success or failure of it can only be judged as we proceed.</p>
		
	</section>
</body>
</html>
