<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-001">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">3</span>An Academic Quibble</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">P</span>erhaps what has been said may permit us to denominate the philosophy of the Bhagavad Gita as <em>Loka-saṃgraha</em> <em>Yoga</em> or the Philosophy of Cosmic Consolidation. However, at this juncture, the use of the term ‘cosmic’ may evoke a doubt, and one may ask if it is ‘cosmic’ as distinguished from the ‘acosmic’ interpretation of Reality. No doubt, academic thinking has differentiated between the two. On the basis of the definitions usually given of them, ‘cosmism’ points to Reality as an all-inclusive being in its personal character and ‘acosmism’ points to an all-exclusive and impersonal being or Reality. But it appears from the present perspective that this is too naïve a distinction to be launched and as such gives rise to scholastic or interpretational camps expending on the emotions of the contenders rather than serving the purpose of pointing to what Reality is in itself. Instances are not wanting of such positions and polemics built around defending positions, even associating within their ambit exclusive means or paths serving particular viewpoints. We are only to be reminded of the instances of it when it is argued that for the realisation of the acosmic truth it is only <em>jñāna</em> which can help and for cosmism it is <em>bhakti</em> that guides us. It is needless to expatiate on this.</p>
		<p>But with reference to the personality of Krishna, who represents the highest Reality (and does not obviously belong to any camp), if we search for the cue, we find that he is not swayed by any of these academic or theoretic considerations in what he teaches as <em>the</em> reality. For him, as the embodiment of the very Reality, ‘cosmism’ and ‘acosmism’, ‘personalism’ and ‘impersonalism’ do not form opposites of denying or negating each other. The Absolute of his conception is such that, it is not only above these considerations, but by a mystery that is only true of Reality, <em>each is the other</em>! In the all-assimilating being of Infinite Reality ‘cosmism’ refers only to or stresses the immanent character of the Infinite Real, giving or forming the basis for what is commonly called ‘individual’ existence and action. It is here that we find ourselves knit through the warp and the woof of time and space, giving form to our being, warmth to our feeling, and objectivity to our reasoning. Whereas ‘acosmism’ points to the transcending nature of the very Real, giving meaning and extension to existence and action as passing beyond time and space. When Reality pulsates as contraction, we gather our mass as it were, and when it pulsates as expansion, we lose it as it were. It is the same Infinite Reality not limited to/by a point, but extends beyond it. The finite is the Infinite and <em>vice versa</em>, not by a process or movement in time but by being, by identity. The Infinite need not <em>become</em> the finite, it <em>is</em> the finite as well. <em>The boundlessness of Infinity excludes all limitations, and so is acosmic, and the boundlessness is so inclusive that nothing is besides it, and so is cosmic</em> (13.13-17). It is evident, then, that any categorization of Reality either as cosmic (or personal) or acosmic (or impersonal), without doubt, constricts the sense and being of its infinity as well as its freedom of expressing itself, not only at the individual level, but also at the farther end of the macrocosm, and even far beyond it. There is neither a split in its freedom nor a demarcation in its infinity. Whether the Lord preaches a personalistic or cosmic picture of Reality or not is to be estimated thus, and the implications of it are laid bare in the key chapter, the <em>Viśwarūpa Darśana Yoga</em>, which we render as ‘Cosmic Depersonalisation’. The vision we are invited to intuit therein misses the point if we go to it with the literal meaning of the word <em>rūpa</em>. We will have occasion to examine the meaning of it soon, but it will suffice here to say that the expression <em>loka-saṃgraha</em> or ‘cosmic consolidation’ gets amplified in the vision of the Lord, a vision which breaks all limits of comprehension through form, yet keeps every breath of ours, who may be witnessing, going on, for it is Reality itself that is breathing in us!</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
