<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-004">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">4</span>The Dialectics Of The Infinite</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">T</span>hat the whole conception of Reality as one of cosmic consolidation is gathered in one gestalt has already been suggested. And for this, the discipline required is to lose our bearings in the boundless, inexplicable Infinity itself – i.e. on the canvas of the Cosmos depersonalised. Actually one ought to seek for the intimations of Reality, for its extent and nature, in the most luminous experience presented in the chapter <em>Viśwarūpa</em> <em>Darśana</em> <em>Yoga</em>, and feel or see for oneself how he is disintegrated or depersonalized and yet picked up, as it were, in flesh and blood, and placed in a position only to be demanded of him that he has his assignments to fulfill and he fulfills his assignments: individual, social and cosmic. It is fitting then, to acquaint ourselves with what the Lord means by <em>viśwarūpa</em> – a cosmic form which is not something that we see as on the stage being played, but as in a stage being ourselves as the players. It is we who constitute the <em>viśwa</em> or the universe, and the <em>rūpa</em> or the form it makes is the indefinable mode of our being as Reality. We have to return to this theme perhaps more than once, but we make a start of knowing it now.</p>
		<p>The impact of this mystic vision on anybody is so great that one is dissolved into the deeper dialectics of existence – even as Arjuna experiences it. If one is fortunate, he gets into that vantage position and from there sees what Arjuna sees: the Lord as everything, conceivable and inconceivable in His incarnate and discarnate forms. Reality is presented as His multi-forms – personal and impersonal, terrestrial and celestial, life and matter, moving and unmoving, atomic and cosmic, material and spiritual, immortality and mortality, existence and non-existence. It is the vision of the Infinite which engulfs all, yet transcends all either in time or in space or in both. It is the vision which destroys the illusion of a separate existence, and devastates the feeling of an immutable identity of one’s self under the pressure of an expanding, all-pervading being and vision. It is the vision of the infinite potency and freedom breaking all the logical and existential contradictions and oppositions found in such exclusive treatments as of the finite and the infinite, human and divine, the living and the non-living, mind and matter, atomic and cosmic. It is also the vision which transports one to the condition of being a living pulse in the Infinite Being through and through. In this grip of the mystic identity, there is nothing that the Lord is not, does not touch, does not sanctify and does not redeem.</p>
		<p>Cosmic depersonalisation is the culmination of an exposition by the Lord Himself of what constitutes Reality. It is Reality explaining to us what Reality is. And when it does, it can plunge us in a direct participation in its dynamics, far beyond the insulations we often build around ourselves. An individual is torn off his covering and rendered into a nameless and formless existence with boundaries non-existing, but astoundingly making him feel the pulse of a dynamic reality in himself.</p>
		<p>It is not an objective or outside vision of Reality which the Lord projects before Arjuna, but a vision which occasions an intimate authentic and existential experience in Arjuna of what constitutes Infinity, ever consolidating or expressing itself as Infinity.</p>
		<p>Now, under much direct intimations of the all-comprehensive and all-inclusive Reality which <em>excludes all exclusions </em>(which is the real meaning of acosmism), the Lord invites us to share a cosmic responsibility to act as instruments to serve the cosmic theme and purpose, a theme which is ever dynamic, expanding and consolidating in meaning and expression to an attuned consciousness; whereas left to ourselves in our isolation and ignorance, we do not fulfill even our individual and narrow responsibilities.</p>
		<p>Can we rise up to the expectations of this Infinite way of living, and of this Cosmic Law? The instance of Arjuna refusing to fight is in point. Until one gets the full picture of existence, he cannot understand the wrong score he is making on the workings of Reality. Arjuna’s fear of sin and his denial to fight are instances of discordant notes struck in the rhythm of Reality. <em>It is a failure to find one’s place in the scheme of things</em>. Also, it is a failure to know the cosmic design and purpose beyond the visions of an ordinary truncated life. When awakened to this reality, Arjuna gets a sense of responsibility and so of fulfillment, by picking up his bow and arrow to fight. From the point of view of the theme of Reality, it is really not getting up to fight, but an awakening to the truth of life, not of the individual but of the Cosmos.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
