<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-001">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">5</span>Other Readings</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">P</span>erhaps, against the background of this cosmic demand of the Cosmic Law (viz. the Lord Krishna Himself), we are to know the meaning of our sharing the cosmic burden, i.e.<em> loka-saṃgraha</em>. We may, however, benefit by noting what interpretations the saints, philosophers and mystics have offered to this expression. Perhaps in the light of them we would be in a position to appreciate the value of the widest application of the meaning of the term we have attempted to provide.</p>
		<p>The term as such occurs twice in the third chapter of the Gita, the <em>Karma Yoga</em> (3.20, 25), and here are some of the most important or prominent readings:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Persuading people not to go the wrong way (Śaṃkara).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Guiding people (Rāmānuja; W. D. P. Hill).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Guidance and control of the world, or taking the world along with one (M. Rangacharya).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Holding people together (Aurobindo).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Sticking to one’s dharma and avoiding the wrong one (Madhusūdana Saraswati).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Welfare of the people (Annie Besant).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Keeping people (in their duties) (K.T.Telang).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Control of the world (Edgerton).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>World maintenance, i.e. the World Order (Radhakrishnan).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Welfare (and coherence) of the world (Zaehner).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Integration of the world (Natarajaguru).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Performing action with an eye to universal welfare (B.G.Tilak).</em></p>
		<p>Though this is not an exhaustive list, yet in these prominent interpretations, we find two or three stresses laid. We find:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Interpretations referring to people or human beings – holding them together, guiding them to select the right path in life and avoiding all wrong action or behavior, or generally referring to the welfare of people,</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Interpretations which refer to the maintenance of the world order or to its integration, and,</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Interpretations which refer to the welfare of the world in coherence with the welfare of the people.</em></p>
		<p>It is clearly evident that the reference in the first category is exclusive, in the sense that it is confined only to people or human beings, and does not refer to the other elements in the universe, which share and build up human life. In the second category, it is not clear whether the ‘world order’ or ‘integration’ refers to the world as a physical entity, or generally has reference to the order of life in the world. The third seems to be comprehensive, but is too vague to convey any definite sense, but seems to be referring to the universal welfare of people.</p>
		<p>From these interpretations it should be quite clear whether <em>loka-saṃgraha</em> stands for any Cosmic Law or cosmic preservation, or it could be restricted to such special or narrow aspects of existence. Perhaps, we are to move beyond the limits set by these interpretations and comprehend by <em>loka-saṃgraha</em> a cosmic order covering all that exists in the physical and psychical, material and spiritual, gross and subtle aspects having direct or immediate, indirect or farfetched influence on us. <em>What is aimed at by the present endeavour is to widen the implications of loka-saṃgraha to cover the universal order of being</em>, beyond our ordinary application to the human welfare only or to a geophysical mass called the world. Human welfare, if we inquire deeply, is not simply physical, material, economic, social and political, but something more. A man is linked with the rest of Reality and with a Cosmic Law, which is interested in him in creating and maintaining conditions for his existence here, and in the possible growth of him with implications of cosmic consolidation.</p>
		<p>That this larger implication is nearly the truth would be evident if we examine the idea of <em>dharma-saṃsthāpana</em> (4.8), of which we have noted earlier. It bears a repetition here. This is consolidating <em>dharma</em> when the fissiparous tendencies act at the subtle and gross levels of thought and action having repercussions not limited to human beings. For example, degeneration and destruction of the human kind is not the only loss to man’s being, but destruction of the animal and plant life is equally dangerous, for, in their destruction, the upkeep of the human species becomes difficult. And all these form integral aspects of the physical and supra-physical, and non-spiritual or spiritual whole demanding equal protection and nourishing. It is a wider perspective of <em>loka-samgraha</em> that throws illumination on the preservative necessity of even the one section of Being, viz. the human kind. <em>Dharma-saṃsthāpana</em> is consolidation of the Cosmic Law, even as <em>loka-saṃgraha</em> is. <em>Dharma-saṃsthāpana</em> or <em>dharma-saṃgraha</em> is not the whole business of stopping <em>varṇa saṃkara</em> (mixing of castes), <em>kula</em> <em>kṣaya</em> (degeneration of sects) or of continuation of oblations to the manes (1.40-44). This is only one aspect in the whole scheme of Reality, but it loses its basic significance if it is isolated from the rest of the cosmic milieu. So also, if <em>loka-saṃgraha</em> is meant to set up a moral, social or intellectual precept for others to follow, it seems not to be the whole business of <em>loka-saṃgraha </em>expected of a typical person like Janaka. And it is so facile an argument and example to set, and, from that standard, even Krishna’s is no better than anyone else’s, one who thinks he can be example to others (3.22-23). More is hidden behind the statements of the Lord touching upon <em>dharma-saṃsthāpana</em> and <em>loka-saṃgraha</em> than is obviously visible to the literal mind. Perhaps, we are missing the real import of the Lord by a casual treatment of the subject, that is, by limiting its extension.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-004">5</a></sup> </p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
