<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-006">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">6</span>Cosmic Dynamics  – Its Meaning</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter"><strong>W</strong></span>e may be permitted to go a little further on the theme of <em>loka-saṃgraha</em> to understand its implication. There is no contention about the fact that when Krishna speaks we hear his authentic voice as the very embodiment of the transcendent truth,<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-008">6</a></sup>  the omni-pervasive Reality, the ordainer and destiny of all creation, and the goal of all endeavour. Perhaps what makes us forget about this Reality is that it is not reached as the result of endeavour, if we consider such endeavour to be different from Reality or as only a means leading to Reality. Such a separation of endeavour from Reality, which is taken as an ideal and as something distinct from (and untouched by) the turmoils involved in the movement towards it, renders both of them abstract as against their inner dynamics of non-duality. One wonders if this movement, this ‘throbbing of the heart’ (call it ‘<em>bhakti’</em>), the ‘heat of the mind’ (<em>i.e.</em>, concentration, call it ‘<em>tapasya’</em> or ‘<em>yoga’</em>), lack the character of a cosmic function and not share the cosmic dynamics or throbbing or heat. This is the mystery hidden from our ordinary sight, namely, the ‘throbbing’ or ‘concentration’ <em>is</em> the working of the cosmos at the individual centre. How can it be denied the character of a function, if we realise that by its simple persistence it is extending beyond itself to something that lies inherently in the very structure of the centre from which it has started? If the ‘throbbing’ did not function, or if it had functioned without the proper intensity or purity, or generally, if the turmoil had not been, the goal would not be.</p>
		<p>What is important to notice is the presence of an organization or order in the bowels of each endeavour of the individual having a natural link with, and pulsating accordingly with, the rhythm of the Cosmos. To put it plainly, there is a local consolidation at each centre of pursuit, and given less than minimum order and concentration (<em>i.e.</em> packing of energy), the propelling would not be. Understood thus, the dynamics of Reality, both at the individual and cosmic levels, is the same, and <em>loka-saṃgraha </em>touches the core of this truth as taking the individual beyond himself in a graded fashion. It is this order, this sustained rhythm and moment <em>as</em> Reality, which is represented by the person of Krishna, the symbol of cosmic order and law of operation (<em>śāśwata dharma goptā</em> 11.18). And how can this afford to be idle, either as the individual centre or as the cosmos? Imagine a situation when it comes to a standstill, <em>i.e.</em>, did not act or function. What would happen? The Law itself should tell us, and Krishna as the Law speaks:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>If I do not function (or act), the worlds</em><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-007">7</a></sup> will collapse, and I will be responsible for all dislocation of cosmic functions, and I will have destroyed all creation (animate and inanimate), (3.24).<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-006">8</a></sup></p>
		<p>It should be evident at the first instance that this is not too much for an ordinary man to claim, and the <em>Lord only</em> could say of the collapse of the worlds and of the dislocation of the cosmic functions or destruction of all creation. That this is no ordinary mortal speaking, and that too casually, is evidenced further on, first, when he gives the word-picture of the infinite potency behind the capital ‘I’, in the chapter on <em>Vibhūti</em> <em>Yoga</em> which can easily be rendered as the dynamics of Self-projection, and further on, when he gives to Arjuna a taste of an authentic experience or participation in/of the dynamics of Infinite Being or dynamics of Self-existence (<em>ātma</em>-<em>yoga</em>) in the chapter on <em>Viśwarūpa</em> <em>Darśana</em>, already alluded to. But from the point of actual participation the experience of depersonalisation of an individual (like Arjuna) caught up in the vortex of cosmic-depersonalisation (as shown in <em>Viśwarūpa Darśana</em>) puts us straight on a point from where the pulse of this capital ‘I’ is felt, and so is worth a repeated elucidation.</p>
		<p>Though the word-picture of the manifestations of the Cosmic Potency (in <em>Vibhūti Yoga</em>), is itself sufficient to become aware of what it is actually, yet, it is in the <em>Viśwarūpa Darśana</em> that the subject (may be Arjuna, or anyone for that matter) is split up into the marrows of one’s being, only to be gathered up and reconstructed, as it were, as the warp and woof of the Infinite or Reality as a whole. Here is the meaning of Reality – intuited participation – a Reality which absorbs or projects all elements, all beings, all forms, all actions, and a Reality which exists within and without (in the cells of one’s own body, and in the pigment of the petal of a flower) a boundless Infinity, the immeasurable and incomprehensible existence, the basis of all that exists and moves.</p>
		<p>It is here, in the dialectics of Reality, shines the luminous vein of the cosmic purpose and consolidation expressing itself so vividly for one who can intuit, but hidden from the non-participant mortal. And so, evidently, Arjuna felt he had nothing left to accomplish in the battlefield, which has not been accomplished by the Law.</p>
		<p>What the Lord showed to Arjuna was the other end of the thread hidden in the bowels of the future, but a future already accomplished by the dynamics of Timeless Infinity. It is extraordinary that for one who enters the Infinity the phases of time are revealed as if they are pages of a book in hand which could be turned back and forth. <em>Viswarūpa</em> <em>Darśana</em> is the splitting of the present instant, or properly, exploding time, and catching it at a given second and spreading it along on the canvas of Infinity, wherein time is shown as a tottering actor keeping pace as commanded by Destiny. It is as if capturing the dynamic time of seconds, minutes, hours and days, and projecting it on a more dynamic Time, which has none of these divisions. This is the Infinite against the background of which the fastest time runs slow, and could be shown as in a slow-motion picture moving backward and forward. It is thus Arjuna could see the future of himself and of others in the battlefield revealed as an event at a single point of non-relative time, the Infinity, the Lord Himself (11.26-30). It is this unique experience which Arjuna gets of the temporal and relative time of the past, present and future projected just as an event in the immeasurable structure of Absolute Time (11.32). The ‘I’ is depersonalized and is presented as the whole of Cosmos wherein even Arjuna is depersonalized and shown as losing his bearings. No wonder he cried for a restoration of a relative body normalcy (11.40-51). However, it should be noted that what Arjuna could see was only a fraction of the Infinite Being that the Lord is (10.42).</p>
		<p>In the light of this meaning of the capital ‘I’ in the statement of the Lord: “if I do not act” (3.24), we may perhaps gather the significance and weight of the phrase <em>loka-saṃgraha </em>as applied to Krishna Himself (3.22-25).</p>
		<p> What happens if the Cosmic Law itself does not operate? Perhaps water would not flow or would not quench thirst, neither could it put off fire; fire would not burn and would not shine; wind would not dry; truth would not act; and purity would not purify. This is dislocation of cosmic functions, which the Lord means, when he says: <em>saṇkarasya</em> <em>ca</em> <em>kartāsyām</em> (“I will be responsible for the dislocation” 3.24). </p>
		<p>If such dislocation happens, what next? The destruction of these worlds and the ending of creation, which means destruction of all beings (3.24). Now aptly one is reminded of the spirit of the words of Yajñavalkya when he propounded the <em>praśāsana</em> of <em>akṣara</em> (<em>Brihadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad,</em> III.8.9):</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>By the command of Akṣara, the Sun, the Moon stay where they are keeping their order; Heaven and Earth stay keeping their respective positions (in the scheme of values); the instants, hours, days, nights, fortnights, months, seasons and years exit measured out (in the scheme of Infinity). Some rivers flow to the east and some to the west (in the strict obedience to the Law of Directions).</em></p>
		<p> And what else, even human values get their recognition: “By its command chastity is praised!”</p>
		<p>What happens if this Principle of Unalterability (<em>Akṣara</em>) of the strict Cosmic Law is countered? The attempt becomes futile and one who tries becomes a pitiable waste. But one who knows this, and follows this, attains the rhythm of Infinity (<em>Brihadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad, </em>III.8.10) as a chord vibrating to the tune of the Unalterable. As though in continuation of this theme, Krishna says, giving a hint of his cosmic stature: “Under My presidentship (and direction) <em>Prakṛti</em> creates, and the moving and the unmoving behave (9.10).” Perhaps all our estimates of this human friend of Arjuna get blurred, deficient and defective if we forget the deeper significance of his warnings:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Those who are ignorant do not know Me who has taken up this human form. They do not understand My Transcending Being (or Dialectics) (9.11).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>I am Myself every creative function (yajña) that goes on; I am the enjoyer (bhokta) and the Master (prabhu). But those who do not know Me truly fall (9.24).</em></p>
		<p>The Lord makes it plain that every element in this creative function is Himself:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>I am Myself the will (behind all offerings). I am the creative act (i.e., the offering). I am the sweet libation too. I am the herb, I am the sacred formula as well. I am the ghee, I am the fire (and what more), I am the burnt even (9.16).</em></p>
		<p>These statements should set us thinking what the Lord is: <em>ahaṃ</em> <em>hi</em> <em>sarva</em> <em>yajñānām</em>, <em>ahaṃ</em> <em>kraturahaṃ</em> <em>yajñāḥ.</em> The significance of these statements not only touches the core of the cosmology of the Gita, but also happens to be the ontological truth.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-005">9</a></sup>  And it is in such statements that we must collect the deep implications of the truth behind the cosmos expressing itself, that is, maintaining itself as Cosmos. What we may see ordinarily is the being of the Cosmos involving us in it, but what we ought to see better is the illimitableness of the dialectics working through the Cosmos and even extending to its own region beyond the visible limits, namely, the primordial Will (<em>kratu</em>), whose dimension ever eludes us. When we speak of consolidation of cosmic purpose, we can only intuit how it is working within the realms of the Cosmos, but whether what we see as the Cosmos is necessarily the whole of the Creative Will is beyond our comprehension. This is the Transcendental Dialectics of Reality, a mystery hidden from our rational and empirical gaze, but yet a mystery which forms the foundation of all that we may gauge. This is the ‘<em>paraṃ</em> <em>bhāva’</em> to which the Lord refers more than once as not being understood by mortals.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
