<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-007">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">7</span>The Creative Act</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter"><strong>T</strong></span>here is yet another way of understanding the dimension of <em>loka-saṃgraha</em>, and it is significant to notice that the Lord Himself prefaces the concept with reference to it. This is <em>yajña</em>, which constitutes the Creative Act – a manifestation of the Creative Will (<em>kratu</em>) mentioned earlier – behind all existence, and is compared to the unceasing movement of a wheel which while rotating keeps itself going. Call it <em>yajña</em> or <em>loka-saṃgraha</em>, both refer to the Reality in its dynamic nature or to its creative continuity and creative existence. Looked at in this light, what we see as cosmos is an ever revolving, assimilating and expanding being described in terms of a dynamic wheel: <em>evaṃ</em> <em>pravartitaṃ</em> <em>cakraṃ</em>. Of this the Lord says: “Whoever does not follow and understand this Law of Cosmic Wheel leads a deluded and a wasteful life” (3.16). The metaphor of the Wheel of Creation is so full of meaning that a literal rendering of the elements constituting it will take away the real significance that it is expected to have. It is the Cosmic Wheel standing for eternal creativity or newness symbolically expressed as ‘<em>yajña’</em>. If this is translated as ‘sacrifice’, then, creativity is sacrifice, and sacrifice is creativity. They are not only coterminous and involve reciprocally, but constitute the very Infinity (<em>brahman</em>) eternally (<em>nityaṃ</em>) in an unalterable (<em>akṣara</em>) chain of creativity. It is <em>sṛṣṭi</em>, and <em>yajña</em> which form the eternal truth. If Infinity is taken as an entity, such an entity is established through eternity in its own creativity (<em>sarvagataṃ</em> <em>Brahma</em> <em>nityaṃ</em> <em>yajñe</em> <em>pratiṣṭhitaṃ – </em>3.15). The Infinity is so fixed in its roots of unalterability or immutability (<em>brahma</em> <em>akṣara samudbhavaṃ – </em>3.15), that what we call elements in the Wheel are so well assimilated into the structure of Infinity that they never alter the constitution of Infinity or affect its dimension in any way. It is such an unalterable Infinity of an unfathomable potency, which is the source of all creative action, <em>karma</em>, and <em>karma</em> is the name for the act which emanates all existents (<em>bhūta</em> <em>bhāvodbhavakaro</em> <em>visargaḥ</em> <em>karma</em> <em>samjñitaḥ – </em>8.3). And naturally, this act is rooted in Infinity or Infinite Existence (<em>karma</em> <em>brahmodbhavaṃ – </em>3.15). And all creativity is rooted in its own fruition (<em>yajña</em> <em>karma</em> <em>samudbhavaṃ – </em>3.14), as it were, of Infinity (<em>brahma</em>) moving towards creativity by an act of self-regenerative sacrifice or <em>yajña</em>. Metaphorically, all these elements, viz. the Infinity, the movement or fructification or regeneration gather like clouds only to pour down the nourishing liquids (rain, <em>parajanya</em>), and create solids (matter, <em>annaṃ</em>) for beings to come up and live on them. Highlighting only the most prominent elements of the Wheel, the Lord describes the entire act as one of <em>yajña</em> – a consolidation (<em>evaṃ</em> <em>pravartitaṃ</em> <em>cakraṃ</em><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-010">10</a></sup> ). The Creative Wheel gyrates on the pivot called <em>yajña</em>, and by <em>yajña</em> alone the spokes and the rim are given a direction, an onward motion, and yet are always held towards the centre. Thus <em>yajña</em> is both the centrifugal and centripetal energy. Even as it throws itself out centrifugally (<em>i.e.</em> expansion), it checks itself in when acting centripetally (<em>i.e.</em>, consolidation). In any movement of a wheel both these unique features are integrally found keeping the identity of the thing from breaking down.</p>
		<p>And it is equally interesting to notice, in another way, how the <em>brahma</em> or Infinity and the Creative Function or <em>yajña</em> are related in the series making the various events in the turn of the Wheel. Established in <em>yajña</em>, the <em>brahma</em> moves, and established in <em>brahma,</em> the <em>yajña</em> moves. The starting and the end points being thus <em>brahma</em> and <em>yajña</em>, one can never distinguish them in the circle or the wheel. Where the circle begins, it ends; and where it ends, it begins. This is the beauty of the wheel, viz. at the same point the extremes meet. That is, they are not extreme ends of a linear movement, but are like the indistinguishable points of fuses in an electrical circuit or ignition which keep the propelling on, and as such lose their differences or identities as connecting or disconnecting links. That is, none can say which is which in the Wheel of the Cosmos. And the various elements or points in the Wheel, viz. matter, creatures with mind, nourishment, action, etc. are so integrally ingrained that one can start from anywhere and, passing through others, come back to the same point. In this Wheel everything is interlinked: matter or mind, the inert or the dynamic, the solid or the liquid. And whoever helps it going is verily acting in terms of consolidation or <em>loka-saṃgraha</em>, but not others.</p>
		<p>In this scheme of <em>yajña </em>or <em>brahma</em>, if consolidation of cosmic purpose, viz. <em>loka-saṃgraha, </em>is taken as an end, it is achieved by <em>yajña</em> as an act. Forms of this <em>yajña</em> are many and can be <em>jñāna</em>, <em>bhakti</em>, <em>karma</em>, <em>vairāgya</em>, <em>ahiṃsā</em>, <em>satya</em>-<em>vacana</em>, <em>ārjava,</em> <em>etc</em>. But <em>yajña</em> being the same thing as <em>brahma</em>, it would not be proper to take it as a means to <em>loka-saṃgraha</em>. And so, the implication is that <em>loka-saṃgraha</em> is itself <em>brahma</em> or <em>yajña</em>. It is significant to note that the Lord Himself says that He is <em>yajña</em>, Himself the k<em>ratu</em> (9.16). This is the insight we are after.</p>
		<p>Whatever constitutes Reality is sacrifice itself, whatever is Life is sacrifice itself – sacrifice, not in a limited literal sense of a liturgical ritual, but as an act of creative function or creation through dismemberment of <em>brahma</em>. Creation is an act of self-sacrifice, not in the sense of self-immolation, but as self-continuity. Continuation is by an act of sacrifice. It is in this original sense that Prajāpati is sacrifice itself. He is the first to sacrifice, and so is its first victim to be offered. As sacrifice Prajāpati is creative, and through ‘sacrifice he creates’, that is, by offering himself he creates.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-009">11</a></sup>  The Lord refers to this sacrifice of Prajāpati in the Gita: “The universe that we see – the animate and the inanimate – is the result of this sacrifice (offering) of the Lord (3.10).” It is the sacrifice of the individual that the Lord teaches so that continuity is kept up (3.9.11). It is this which makes for consolidation. Our living, eating, acting and everything must form essential elements in the offering or sacrifice we are expected to make. In a word, whatever we do must be offering or libation at the altar of sacrifice (9.27), so that sacrifice continues, and with it, the life that libates. Hence the Lord says: “With <em>yajña </em>Prajāpati created all beings at first, and said, “by <em>yajña</em> you prosper,” “let <em>yajña</em> be your fulfiller (3.10).” It is clear, therefore, that <em>yajña</em> which is self-sacrifice is the act of self-continuity, self-preservation, and self-enjoyment. And anything that does not involve self-sacrifice is bound to go against the interests of this continuity, or more specifically, consolidation of being, and so stands condemned. Then, it is rightly said that all action (cognitive, conative and affective) is to be oriented to <em>be</em> <em>yajña;</em> otherwise, it binds one to the fruits of one’s misdeeds (3.9). This is the meaning of ‘self-destruction’. Then, all <em>karma</em> is intended to be <em>yajña</em> in this sanctified sense (<em>yajñārthaṃ karma</em>, <em>tadarthaṃ karma</em>) and to gain the sanctity of <em>yajña</em> each <em>karma</em> is to be done with dispassion, and to say the least, liberation is not separate from acting thus (3.9).</p>
		<p>At one stroke two things are won: <em>karma</em> which is freed from sin (3.13), and liberation from <em>karma</em> (fate) through performance of <em>karma</em> (action) as <em>yajña</em> (4.31). This is the soul of all <em>yajña</em>, <em>karma </em>and <em>mokṣa;</em> and we are invited to catch this soul or <em>ātman</em> and are asked to abide in it (3.17). This is attaining Infinity or Eternity (<em>brahma sanātanaṃ</em>) (4.31). One sacrifices oneself out into Eternity or Immortality! </p>
		<p>The participation, then, in this <em>yajña,</em> <em>i.e.</em> work (<em>i.e.</em> reality), is the act of identification and assumption of a conscious responsibility in the being of Reality. And contrary to this, any kind of laziness, indifference or separateness is an act of suicide and not sacrifice (3.16; 9.12). Individuality in the sense of isolated living and development from the rest of existence is false individuality and is suicidal, and the true sense of individuality is attainment of unity in existence, where the small, egoistical individual ceases to be, and assumes the individuality of Infinity. And so, the real individual is the Infinite itself. It is the fructification of all action, all sacrifice. And what more, the Infinite is the boundless existence wherein sacrifice and work never stop at any stage. It is an existence of an eternal consolidation and assimilation always pointing <em>not to a finished end</em>. It is an adventure wherein every thought, action, and feeling are themselves offerings – and these offerings have no end other than themselves, for they themselves form <em>brahman</em> or Infinity:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>The sacrifice is the act of the Infinite (brahma). What is sacrificed is the Infinite. What burns (as the offering) is the Infinite. What is burnt is the Infinite (too). And what is aimed at by the absorption is the Infinite only (4.24).</em></p>
		<p> The insight of this passage clinches the issue and lays bare the indistinguishable identity of existence and what we may ordinarily cognize as individual or separate acts. In this sense, none can specifically identify and point out which is <em>brahma</em> (Infinity), which is <em>yajña</em> (sacrifice) and which is offering, in existence. For each is the other in the process of self-extension or self-dismemberment into another, and its self-creation and self-continuity. This is the wheel which rotates (3.16), and rotating, it sustains itself steadily. It is the steady balance of the Wheel kept up in its movement, and if the movement stops it falls. The Lord represents this Wheel, and even so, Reality stands for this Wheel. The Lord is <em>acyuta,</em> i.e. unfallen.</p>
		<p>And so, if we are able to grasp the significance of <em>yajña</em> as <em>reality consolidating itself</em>, perhaps we are getting near the truth of <em>loka-saṃgraha</em>, whose supreme demonstration is the Lord Himself as the Cosmic Law, not resting for a second or even a fraction of it.</p>
		<p>A vision that is not in tune with this secret of being or does not approximate to this is prone to come up with a difficulty: What is one’s freedom if one is inextricably linked with this eternal, infinite, indivisible dialectics of Reality, in this ever-rotating Wheel of Reality?</p>
		<p>From what has been noted so far, one’s being or existence in this Wheel is native and inescapable. And inescapability is not an indication of one’s loss of freedom. Bound up with Infinity or with the movement of the Wheel, <em>one’s destiny is oriented towards Infinity</em>, and what can be freedom other than that? If one is not deluded, freedom consists in being the whole, and bondage in being small or finite. Whereas self-sacrifice is the duty in the structure of self-continuity, it gets fulfilled in being the Whole, which is being free. The opposite of this, viz. escaping from one’s natural destiny (i.e. from being the Infinite) is suicide. This is <em>ātma-hatyā</em> in the real sense. Ignorance of the nature of Reality as the Infinite Being, wherein no individual is finite and useless, and dereliction of one’s duty or function as an aspect of consolidation of one’s own self, is sin – intellectual and moral – that one accumulates. It is this, which constitutes and perpetuates a parallel or anti-momentum of an egoistic separateness from that of the Wheel. While freedom is not escape from the <em>brahma-cakra</em>, bondage is to set oneself up against the cosmic force by the suicidal act of resistance, laziness, indifference, and so on. That is, technically, avoiding one’s <em>karma</em> or function, one’s contribution or sacrifice is denying to one’s self the joy of participation in the momentum of the Cosmic Wheel. While all parallel and anti-movements lack a self-regeneration (for they cut themselves from the cosmic dynamo), they ultimately waste away being crushed by the greater force of the Cosmic potency (18.58, 59, 60, 61). This is the wasteful life (<em>mogha-jīvanaṃ</em>) which the Lord deplores (3.16; 9.12). While suicide results in one’s getting wasted, sacrifice results in one’s getting recreated!</p>
		<p>Thus, in this cosmic picture or existence of an ever- dynamic Whole, everything <em>is</em> and by <em>being</em> everything, it functions. And so: 1. the one who aims at sacrifice, in the real sense, <em>is</em> (i.e. exists), and <em>continues</em> (and that which continues ceaselessly is the infinite), and 2. the one who aims to act contrarily becomes wasted materially, trying to build up wasting hopes, wasting actions, and wasting knowledge. These men are demons by nature, who set themselves against the divine and do not participate in the Divine (9.12).</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
