<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-001">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">8</span> The ‘Ways’ – What They Mean</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">I</span>f what we have tried to know is the perspective of Reality as an Infinite Self-re-creative Existence, it is worthwhile to discover <em>from its point of view</em> the meanings of <em>karma, jñāna,</em> and <em>bhakti </em>as forces of non-resilient consolidation and equilibrium. Against the background of what has been presented as <em>loka-saṃgraha</em> the discussion is essential and relevant.</p>
		<p>To start with <em>karma</em>. The most direct meaning of ‘<em>karma’</em> refers to the creative or dynamic phase of the self-projective Reality in its resplendent glory, and so verily, points to the Law of Movement and Creation:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>bhūtabhāvodbhavakaraḥ visargaḥ karma samjñitaḥ. </em></p>
		<p><em>Karma</em> is the name for bringing into being the existents, and points to their discharging of functions (8.3). This is the objective and physical dimension of movement and creation.</p>
		<p>The second meaning refers to the initial will, <em>kratu</em>, at the base of all action and creation. It has the touch of sentience, and verily, belongs to the Infinite Whole with a design and purpose, and is represented by the Lord Himself. And its extension is found in the will of the sentient agents. This is the subjective and conative dimension of Being.</p>
		<p>There is a third meaning of ‘<em>karma</em>’ as the Vedic ritual, which the Gita mentions, but with which perspective the Gita is not involved. The use of the word ‘<em>yajña</em>’ is not as an alternative to the Vedic ‘<em>karma</em>’, as it is relieved of all its narrow implication and refers to any function or disposition at any level of life and matter in the scheme of Reality.</p>
		<p><em>Karma</em> in its creative and conative aspects not only provides the cue for the dynamic basis of existence, but also links up all activity with the resultant effects both physical and moral, and fixes a responsibility. The concept is so comprehensive that while analyzing it, the Lord introduces us to the varied contents of existence or being – the spiritual and the non-spiritual, or the subjective and the objective. The concept generally touches all subtle and gross manifestations or forms of existence, and binds the whole of Reality as a structure of undivided existence. We shall try to know how the Lord does it, phase by phase.</p>
		<p>The Reality which the Lord presents is so overwhelmingly infinite that it includes even the blind and the insentient principle, <em>prakṛti</em>, ever dynamic and active, but acting under the guidance of a conscient purpose, call it ‘God’, or ‘<em>Brahman</em>’ or ‘Self’ – it is immaterial. That is, <em>prakṛti</em> presents both the subtle and the gross states of force and manifestation, wherein we find both the abstract and the concrete illumination and buoyancy (<em>sattva guṇa</em>), change and dynamism (<em>rajas</em>), and darkness, inertia and retardation (<em>tamas</em>). These are the maintaining and driving forces of the universe, and never can one stop them from acting. They refer to the principle of activity or <em>karma</em> at the objective or physical level. It is the inconscient or the unconscious agent of consolidation of the cosmic energy in man and animal, living and non-living, static and dynamic, sub-atomic and galactic, putting forth new forms and new species, new existential situations of physical and biological nature. This energy, which goes by the name of <em>prakṛti</em>, is so universal and pervasive, that any attempt at individualizing it as a packet or a body belonging to either X or Y or Z is a mere presumption built on illusory egoism of a separate existence and separate order. That nobody can stop the physical processes of growth, decay and death, and that all our respiratory, circulatory, digestive, excretory and nervous systems are not managed by us, will bring to the forefront the fact that only so long as the vital energies (the <em>prāṇas</em>) (<em>i.e.</em> manifestations of the cosmic inconscient energy called <em>prakṛti</em>) keep them going<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-012">12</a></sup>  we have an arrogant claim of possessing a body, and of having a mastery over it. None can, in his arrogance, stop this, is the verdict of the lord: <em>nigraham kim kariṣyati</em>? (3.33). One of the meanings of ‘<em>karma’ </em>in the Gita is this aspect of the objective dialectics of the cosmic energy beneath the individual and the universal, microcosmic and the macrocosmic. That one cannot idle away uselessly his energies or forget his share of the cosmic function localized at the individual centre is the meaning of a relentless process of <em>karma</em> or Reality consolidating itself. And if one were to dabble with this process or being, he will be devastated in this course of the onward march of the cosmic purpose.</p>
		<p>But what is more significant is the treatment of <em>karma</em> at the subjective level of the individual, i.e. of <em>karma</em> as willed action and <em>karma</em> as the result of willed action. It is here the Lord shows Himself as the supreme artist laying down the guidelines for converting what is obviously a routine function or work into an art of cosmic consolidation. That is where <em>karma-yoga</em> comes.</p>
		<p>To make one’s life meaningful, the Lord prescribes <em>karma-yoga</em>, the art of subserving the cosmic purpose by smooth-sailing methods of adjustment and harmony, that is, by making perfect the machinery of objective work with no reference to the results or allowing the results to take care of themselves. For, if the machinery is perfect, by the law of necessity, results would be perfect. Hence <em>karma</em> as art (<em>i.e. karma-yoga</em>) is disinterestedness with regard to results and interestedness in attaining perfection at the level of basic operation and consolidation – a crucial qualification for making all work a <em>yoga</em>. <em>Karma-yoga</em> is the wholesome art (<em>yogaḥ karmasu kauśalaṃ) </em>of submitting to the dialectics of the dynamic Reality within oneself and outside, and helping to speed up the process of consolidation, which is not only individual but also cosmic.</p>
		<p>What transforms <em>karma </em>into <em>karma-yoga</em> is the additional qualification in the dynamics of function, which goes by the name <em>jñāna</em> (wisdom). <em>Jñāna</em> is not, as is ordinarily taken, an exclusive ivory-towerish intellectual pursuit of any reality, nor is it any academic or theoretic analyzing of what the Self is and what it is not, or what the perishable is and what it is not. It is not even the cultivation of intellectual Puritanism to keep one’s fingers locked up from material dirt. If we are to understand the true perspective of the picture of depersonalisation of the Lord and of dismemberment of the Cosmic personality, and of how the Lord Himself is involved in the act of sacrifice, which is the regenerative creative activity, we may be able to understand that <em>jñāna </em>is sentience (another aspect of the very Reality that is dynamic) giving a direction to the cosmic existence and purpose, and energizing the movement at cosmic consolidation. It is Consciousness at work in its most universal meaning both within the lowest of the creatures and in the most highly developed. If at the cosmic level, all activity we see in <em>prakṛti</em> is because of the direction given to it by that principle of Consciousness, at the individual level, <em>jīva</em> is the sentient manifestation of that consciousness brought into being to illumine and consolidate a comparatively smaller field, a localised field of reference, with all its potentialities to subserve the purpose of the non-local or universal Reality (9.8.9; and 7.5; 15.7).</p>
		<p>Where exactly <em>karma</em> and <em>jñāna</em> come together as aspects of cosmic consolidation is quite evident in the Lord’s teaching. What is inconscient or mechanical is to be illumined by a light that is <em>not physical</em>. This is the place where sentience comes in: an activity (<em>karmic </em>or dynamic process of Reality) is now <em>understood</em> as such, and a conscious participation in the working of the cosmic theme is <em>intended</em>. This is <em>jñāna-yoga</em> or <em>buddhi-yoga</em>. If <em>karma-yoga</em> is dexterity in action, <em>jñāna-yoga</em> is intelligence in action. Action and intelligence both being aspects of a self-consolidating Reality, a successful individual is one who lends himself consciously to the purpose, <em>i.e.</em>, who works to bring about what is obviously a factor contributing to the consolidation of a universal purpose. So, he works with a luminous disposition, and his work is a duty and a responsibility, but not ones imposed by an external agency. The duty and responsibility are expressions of an inner dialectics of the cosmic theme working itself under the illumination of the conscious principle which is primordially behind all existence and action, a principle which is not different from the individual now acting. This is the deepest significance of the phrases ‘<em>ātma-rataḥ</em>’, ‘<em>ātma-saṃtuṣṭaḥ</em>’ (3.17). He is a ‘<em>dhīra</em>’ both in intellect (<em>i.e.</em>, wise) and in courage (<em>i.e.</em>, brave). He is the one who has his senses under control both during the best circumstances and worst of tragedies. He is the one who is fixed in and about <em>theoria</em>, and never wavers to apply it, as others are prone to, at each turn of action. Undaunted by anger or hate, greed, love or egoism, he is the supreme example in manifestation (<em>i.e.</em>, as a man) of the Cosmic Law operating. He is fully awake to Reality and in this he is totally different from the rest of humanity – he is a <em>sthitaprajña, </em>a <em>bhakta</em> and a <em>jñāni</em> (2.54-72; 12.13-19).</p>
		<p>If <em>karma</em> is the objective Reality in its dynamic aspect, <em>karma-yoga</em> is a conscious serving with dexterity of skill. It is spiritual lubrication causing smoother flow of things. It is planning. It is carrying out the movement of consolidation without waste. Likewise, if <em>jñāna</em> is the principle of illumination and sentience, <em>jñāna-yoga</em> is consciousness of the dynamics or dialectics of Reality as a whole, requiring one to consciously participate in its purpose by giving it the glow of intelligent responsibility, and investing meaning to all action and manipulating into a helpful technique of service. (4.6-9, 13-14, 19, 20-24). On the plane that is envisaged, and in the scale that is held out, Reality is the unending, unexcluding and all-sustaining principle (as is shown by the Lord in the chapter of <em>Viśwarūpa Darśanaṃ</em>, wherein each individual is assured a meaningful existence, provided a harmony is struck in him of <em>jñāna </em>and <em>karma</em>. This is the view of Reality one is invited to have through a heightened vision (<em>divya-cakṣuḥ,</em> 11.8).</p>
		<p>Now, turning to <em>bhakti</em>. The application of <em>jñāna </em>and <em>karma</em> to serve the cosmic theme in thought and action with an unswerving concentration and absorption is <em>bhakti</em>. What gives intensity to a purpose and warmth to a participation is this absorption, which is <em>bhakti</em>. The widest and the most universal application of it or the practice of it covering the whole of cosmos – the far and the near, the living and the non-living, form and the formless – is the test of its efficacy in achieving the cosmic purpose (6.29-31, 9.55, 12.12-19, 9.29, 18.54). No single part or aspect of Reality is exclusively reserved or selected for its pre-occupation. If so, to restrict its meaning and treat it with an exclusiveness of an identity and form (<em>i.e.</em> a conceptually understandable form of a person, for example,) would be to render it weak and not strong. Calling <em>bhakti</em> a technique is to deprive it of its identity and directing it to the universal, formless or impersonal is to miss the purpose behind. It has been a manifestation only to serve the largest and the inscrutable dimension of the Real or Reality. And in this, <em>bhakti</em> does not lose, but gains. What may be lost as emotional content is gained by the basic experience of the Infinity by absorption. He is the <em>bhakta</em> who sees the finite as the Infinite and Infinite in all the finites (6.29-30). What is lost as one’s separate identity is gained by the expansion of being the whole or in its all-inclusive identity with Reality. What shapes this vision or <em>bhakti</em> is the illumination regarding the dimensions of the Real arising out of a first-hand participation which is so basic, deep and universal that nothing could stand comparison to it. This is the real participation which the Lord recommends and gives it a distinction by calling it ‘My <em>Yoga’</em> (<em>madyogaṃ</em>), as if it were different from all the other types of <em>yoga</em> we may be speaking of. An elaboration of the nature of what the Lord calls ‘His <em>yoga’</em> will occupy us a little later.</p>
		<p>Now, with regard to the success or failure of an endeavour consciously pursued: while <em>karma</em> is rendered into <em>karma-yoga</em> and <em>jñāna</em> into <em>jñāna-yoga</em><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-011">13</a></sup> <em>, i.e.</em> where skill and intelligence are utilized in the scheme of consolidation, one may develop an egoism which is undesirable, viz. developing an over-confidence that he would and is bound to succeed and not fail. However, the problem of success or failure is to be viewed not only individually but from the point of view of Reality itself. The Lord directs us to develop this perspective and says that even to think of succeeding is wrong. He points out that for anybody’s success <em>the individual is not solely responsible</em>. There are more causes than one, at least five (<em>pañcaitāni kāraṇāni</em> – 18.13), to be specific, which include the <em>adhyātmika</em>, <em>adhibhautika</em>, and <em>adhidaivika</em>. The purpose of the Lord in drawing one’s attention to this is quite clear: to point out the insignificant or minor part of an individual effort in the accomplishment of a deed, and to show how the responsibility is dispersed over a larger sphere and on different subtle or gross conditions constituting Reality in its unfathomable dimension, because <em>it is the whole of Reality that is operating at any particular point of existence</em>. And so, it is not so much the desire or calculation of success as a result that should be the objective of a conscious act, <em>but work itself</em>. </p>
		<p>This is <em>karma-yoga</em>. Looked at from the larger perspective of Reality, there seems to be absolutely no difference between success and failure. It is as if that the Lord asks us not to take to him a list of our successes, but those of our failures. Perhaps, He values these latter more because of the element of disinterestedness which will have gone into the endeavour. Also, it is valued more for the element of cautiousness in avoiding a wrong. But really there is nothing like a failure in this Reality, if ever the intensions are pure and unmixed with egoism, and directed to serve the Cosmic function.</p>
		<p>This amounts to saying that no work or function is purely individual, but is cosmic. And in this, failure is not lost, nor even the failing (2.40; 6.40). No one absorbed in this dies (<em>na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati</em> – 9.31). Perhaps, the Lord expects us thus to be <em>lost</em> in it! More than once He seems to demand this and calls a person thus lost a ‘<em>Yogi</em>’. And this ‘losing’ is the absorption which the Lord speaks of as ‘His <em>yoga</em>’. It is surrender to the highest wisdom without any tinge of an arrogance or conceit that may be lurking beneath the attitude of a <em>jñāni</em> egoistically trying to participate with an absolute sense of success. It is surrender total and complete of one’s individuality or personality, without the sense of a residual self that may be lurking in the heart of a <em>bhakta</em>. It is surrender of indifference and laziness to gear up the best of skills in manipulating things that may be lurking in the action of a <em>karmin</em> (18.57-58, 66). A participation, if it is wholesome, requires a rounding off the edges between and amongst what we ordinarily take as exclusive ways, viz. <em>jñāna</em>, <em>bhakti</em>, and <em>karma</em>. At each stage, the Divine purpose or consolidation requires these to be refined and be made complementary (3.4, 4.18-19). With the transformation of a mechanical action into an enlightened duty, and with the dislodging of egoistic arrogance by surrender and absorption, the individual is metamorphosed into the universal or cosmic. That is, he is <em>lost</em>, but really he <em>is not lost</em>. This is the meaning of the Lord’s assurance: <em>na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati</em> (9.31). </p>
		<p>The transformation which comes over the individual centre of action is that it ceases to function as an <em>isolated</em> factor or individual, but becomes the Infinite working at any centre (<em>matkarmakṛt</em> – 11.55, 12.10). The law of infinity is such that <em>any point in it is its centre, and from anywhere it can work, and while working, can consolidate and conserve</em>. This is the state of the Lord. He calls it <em>madbhāva</em> and says that anyone who lends himself to be the centre of an Infinite existence is doing <em>matkarma</em> (‘my function’). Such a vision should naturally rouse a sense of fulfillment in each centre (<em>i.e.</em>, the individual beings), for as it functions, it shares the being and purpose of the Infinite, and success and failure are just immaterial (2.38, 57). This is the sense in which the Lord says, obviously in contradictory terms: </p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>I have no work to do in these three universes, but if I do not function, the world will collapse (3.22-24).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>I have no wants, but I want people to follow me (3.22-23).</em></p>
		<p>This is the philosophy of <em>Karma-yoga</em> or Recoilless Action, which the Lord is presenting. And He does it not in the way a human being presents a speculative description of Reality, but as an actual analysis of the dynamics of His own being and of how He exists and functions.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
