<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-009">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">9</span>The Lord’s Dictum – “Nothing Less Than My Yoga”</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter"><strong>P</strong></span>erhaps this is the proper place to elaborate on a point of very great importance raised a little while ago and follow up the argument to show that the Lord’s most significant evaluation of <em>jñāna</em>, <em>karma</em>, and <em>bhakti</em> is that they are not to be unconditionally accepted just because they bear the appellation <em>yoga</em>, for if they do not answer a particular description or do not work themselves up to a pitch, they cannot be called <em>yoga</em> as such. This is of crucial importance in view of the fact that the Lord speaks of a ‘<em>yoga</em> of His own’ (<em>madyoga</em>) (12.11); He declares: “Behold My bountiful<em> yoga” </em>(<em>paśya me yogamaiśwaraṃ</em> – 11.7), and showed His mystifying and bountiful dimension of being (11.9).</p>
		<p>What is this <em>yoga</em> which is His own, a bountiful one, of which He is the <em>Īśwara</em> (<em>Yogeśwara</em>)?</p>
		<p>Perhaps, here is a hint we should gather that His <em>Yoga</em> is <em>not a means to an end</em>, but is <em>essentially an ontological state of existence</em>. This sense gets confirmed when the Lord says: “See My <em>yoga,”</em> and unfolds what is known as ‘<em>Viśwarūpa</em>’. Obviously, then, from the simple meaning of ‘<em>yoga</em>’ to what the Lord calls ‘His <em>yoga</em>’ it is a long way, and we are to discover the inner meaning or dialectics of this ‘<em>Kṛṣṇa</em> <em>yoga’</em>, if we may call it so, and perhaps, in the illumination that may dawn on us we gather what we are after.</p>
		<p>Let us start with simple statements which occur in the Gita about the meaning of ‘<em>yoga</em>’. An ordinary study will make us think of <em>yoga</em> as skill in action (<em>yogaḥ karmasu kauśalaṃ</em> – 2.50), or as harmony or balance (<em>samatvam yoga ucyate</em> – 2.48), even as the Lord helps us to pick these phrases as possible definitions.</p>
		<p>However, are we to go by the colophon and take the despondency of Arjuna (<em>viṣāda</em>) a <em>yoga</em>? Would that be consistent with the above definitions suggested of ‘<em>yoga</em>’? As per the colophon, each of the chapters is called a ‘<em>yoga</em>’, and note that the term is not limited to things well known as <em>karma</em>, <em>jñāna</em>, and <em>bhakti</em>.</p>
		<p>Then, shall we understand by ‘<em>yoga</em>’ the one enunciated, for example, by Patanjali? The Lord seems to refer to breath control and control of mental states (8.12; 6.20), but that is not <em>yoga</em> which the Lord is expecting from us. Had it been so, the Gita would not have added anything more than the <em>Yoga-Sūtras</em> in our understanding of Reality. While Patanjali’s <em>yoga</em> is a means or technique to achieve a <em>viyoga</em> or separation, we cannot with any sense of propriety apply it to <em>karma</em>, <em>jñāna</em> and <em>bhakti</em>. In fact, these imply anything but <em>viyoga</em>, and certainly, chapter titles like <em>Puruṣottama Yoga</em>, <em>Viśwarūpadarśana Yoga</em> and such do not imply <em>viyoga,</em> <em>i.e.,</em> disconnection.</p>
		<p>Then, what of <em>yoga</em> as balance or harmony, <em>i.e.,</em> <em>samatvaṃ</em>? Is it equilibrium of the mind? If so, how can <em>viṣāda</em> in <em>Arjuna-Viṣāda Yoga</em> be a <em>yoga</em>? Is it equilibrium of the mind as in Patanjali Yoga? We have seen that it is not. Or is it balance among things of equal potency or power or status or of any other form of being, or balance between opposite and unequal things or forces? What is obvious to the eye is that things are not equal, nor are forces equal. Is equilibrium equipoise of some sort? If so, insentient nature can attain it, and a pond of muddy water in that way could be equivalent to an undisturbed mind achieved by concentration! And if all these do not mean <em>samatvaṃ</em>, we ask, in a scheme of Reality what is balance between the temporal and the non-temporal, the finite and the infinite, the one and the many? Are these opposites, and if so, how are they held? Is it that they cancel out their opposition by what is known as the dynamics of opposition, as we find it in the electromagnetic field, wherein a reconciliation or balance is arrived at in the form of a unity, i.e. <em>samatvaṃ?</em></p>
		<p>Evidently, <em>yoga</em> is not simply to be disposed of as a simple skill or balance (and ‘skill’ in its baser sense can be vile craftiness, and, as such, cannot be recommended by the Lord). The skill and balance that the Lord speaks of are of a higher order where cancellation by the dynamics of opposition is ruled out by the mystery which constitutes Infinity, which assimilates varieties and opposites by a law normally unavailable in the realm of abstractions, that is, when individual elements are torn off a structure and viewed as distincts or opposites. </p>
		<p>The implication of <em>yoga</em> as <em>samatvaṃ</em> is something more of an incommensurate and infinite character, and should be viewed from the point of Reality, which not only does not cancel anything, but also does not stop at anything. The dialectics of <em>samatvaṃ</em> of the Lord’s conception goes beyond the synthesis of a logical opposition between a thesis and an antithesis, and of the physical opposition between the positive and the negative, and resolves the tangle of opposition on a higher plane of <em>ekatvaṃ</em> or unity<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-014">14</a></sup> , the mystery of which the Lord alone can tell us:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>The attuned (yogī) who is thus absorbed in Infinity sees himself in every existent, and every existent in himself always and with equal intensity (whether a being is small or big, subtle or concrete, animal or man).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Whoever sees Me everywhere (i.e. in everything and as everything), and everything in Me, him I never lose, nor he ever loses Me. </em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Whoever adores Me as existing in all existents in a super-identity (ekatvaṃ), in whatever conditions he be, is an attuned (yogī) and lives in Me.</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Whether it is pleasure or pain, the one who sees the same everywhere as like unto himself is the highest attuned (parama-yogī), according to Me (6.29-32).</em></p>
		<p>He who is in unity sees unity. That is the <em>yoga</em> which the Lord points out through these verses. He has set before us an ideal of all <em>yogas,</em> viz<em>.</em> His own <em>yoga,</em> having an import wherein separation and imbalance are dissolved at the existential level of Reality. This is virtually His being, and no end is higher than this state and no values higher than this <em>Yoga.</em></p>
		<p>If one tries to recapitulate the occasions when the Lord speaks of <em>His yoga</em> as the ‘highest’ (<em>paramaṃ yogaḥ</em>) and of that <em>Yogi </em>as the ‘best’ (<em>yuktatama</em>), one will be astonished not only at the number of times when this <em>Yoga</em> is mentioned, but realizes also how one will have missed its import in the gamble of the other <em>yogas</em> not tuned up properly, the often-mentioned of them being <em>karma</em>, <em>jñāna</em> and <em>bhakti,</em> which are mistaken as techniques of reaching ideals.</p>
		<p>There has always been a warning in the teaching of the Lord that within the cosmic field and with the potentialities available for every man, he can gear up his strength, intelligence, cleverness and concentration to attain a <em>siddhi</em>, but it may after all be ill-oriented. In one of the most suggestive pieces of his disclosing the highest truth (<em>Jñāna-Vijñāna Yoga</em>), the Lord remarks how very easy it is for men of great ability to fall a prey to the obvious, <em>i.e.,</em> to the concrete, the empirical and the worldly (all these are connoted by <em>prakṛti</em> or objectivity and its manifestations), and how difficult it is to overcome the delusion of these lesser ideals or even achievements. The warning is so very implicit (7.13-15), yet, if we pass it by, sure as it is, we are condemned to relativity. And what makes for this relativity is to be sought not only for understanding the end by which the delusions of the world are overcome, but also for evaluating the worth of every bit of the lower values, or for assessing the existents (7.4-5).<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-013">15</a></sup>  We come across in our spiritual life and experience such existents, viz. the abstract and the concrete, the inner and the outer, the dynamic and the static, the elemental and the godly, and the source of all being which is Infinity, and how it maintains, conserves and consolidates itself over and above these opposed and contradictory elements. </p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>… those who seek refuge in Me can know everything: the Infinite, the Self, the dynamics of being. Whoever knows Me along with the basically elemental, the basically Divine and the basic Sacrifice … know Me (7.29-30).</em></p>
		<p>There is a pole star here which should orient all our march, viz. the Me (<em>mama</em>). We have seen earlier the significance of the capital ‘I’ as the ontological dynamo sustaining everything that has being, and now, it is ‘Me’, and all other forms of this pronoun which should be understood as the state towards which all aspirations, movements and conditions tend.</p>
		<p>Look at these terms, the Lord repeats:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>matparaḥ, mayyāveśya, maccittā, madgata prāṇā, manmanā, matkarmakṛtu, matparāyaṇa, madāśrayā, matsaṃsthā, mayyāsakta, etc. etc. </em></p>
		<p>The Yoga that’s oriented thus is <em>madyoga</em> (13.11).</p>
		<p>And there has been a clear indication in the teaching of the Lord that a Yogi of this qualification is superior to all who may have the capacity to be a <em>tapasvin</em>, a <em>jñāni</em> or a <em>karmin</em>. Arjuna is directed to go beyond these to be a Yogi (capital ‘Y’ – 6.46), and is told, “Whoever among all the <em>yogis</em> dissolves everything (including himself) in Myself and is lost in devotion to Me is the superlative <em>Yogin (yuktatama</em>)” (<em>6.47</em>).</p>
		<p>A <em>buddhi-yoga</em>, a <em>saṃnyāsa-yoga</em> or a <em>karma-yoga</em> which have no fundamental understanding of this are just skills and not <em>Yoga </em>in the real sense that the Lord is anxious to convey. He indicates that there is a cosmic or divine purpose, and that one who is not in the grip of its dialectics is wasting his time, if he is merely straining to attain <em>citta vṛtti nirodha</em>. Such a one is only showing a skill. The Lord says, “I bestow <em>buddhi-yoga </em>so that he may attain Me.” And there is something more. The Lord speaks out to the dismay and discomfiture of the highly cultivated in all <em>yogas</em> and in moral conduct that even without these, or bypassing these, the end could be attained by the unsophisticated and the lowly:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Even if one is of mean character (or of bad manners), if devoted to me unflinchingly, he is to be known as good-souled, as he is fixed in the right order or theoria (9.30).</em></p>
		<p>And by this right devotion he becomes transformed. He is to be considered a <em>dharmātmā</em> (‘good-souled’), <em>i.e.,</em> essentially a carrier of the cosmic law which sustains and nourishes all beings, and he attains undisturbed peace.</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Know, My devotee is never lost! (i.e. not wasted away) (9.31).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>And the same is true of people born sinfully, or if one is a woman, a business man or a śūdra (9.32-33).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Renouncing all dharmas (resorts) surrender to Me (the final resort), and I shall redeem you from all sins (18.66).</em></p>
		<p>And these sins are not merely moral, but can also be lapses in any field of one’s being – intellectual, concentrational or devotional. The implication is quite evident: chastity and perfection are naturally his who is faultless in thought, feeling and action, and no birth or depravity affects him who has the resolve, the right <em>dharma, the Me</em>.</p>
		<p>And, now, returning to the original question – though it is answered by now – “What is this <em>Yoga</em> which the Lord said He is going to present (<em>paśya me yoga maiśwaraṃ</em>)?” He says, it is not only to be seen, but also to be authentically entered into, i.e. experienced (…<em>draṣṭuṃ ca tattvena praveṣṭuṃ ca</em> – 11.54). What is that intuitive vision of Reality and experiential knowledge which one gets of such <em>Yoga</em> and by which the Lord expects each <em>yogin</em> to think of Reality as Reality itself may think of him? We will have to find the answers in the very <em>Viśwarūpa </em>which the Lord <em>is</em> and which is not present only at a particular time or occasion as we may ordinarily presume. The answer is to be seen in the unity that is constitutive of Reality – including the individuals that may be gazing, even as Arjuna did. It is a unity which is so overwhelming and basic that, within the sweep of its being, each element, movement, impulse, direction, and so on, become inextricably one with Reality, and never can be alien to the being of it. The depersonalisation of the Lord is not the disappearance of the individual, but is the appearance of Him as everything, wherein everything is fitted into the pattern of a wholeness (surpassing considerations of logical consistency), and nothing is pitched against the other. How many ways the Lord chooses to drive this point in! We are required to ponder over statements such as: “The Lord is everything” (<em>sarvam vāsudevaḥ</em>) (7.19), and see that the <em>yogi</em> should understand this unity, and “be established in it, worshipping Him as abiding in all,” and that “he alone is a <em>Yogi</em> who lives in the Lord, whatever be the mode of his being (6.31).” “The Lord is the Cosmic-acosmic law,” and sharing the dialectics of the law (<em>brahma yoga yuktātmā – </em>5.21) is the real <em>Yoga</em>. It is hardly necessary to elaborate.</p>
		<p>Still, what is pertinent to understand and feel is that <em>karma</em>, <em>jñāna</em>, <em>bhakti</em> – and innumerable other ways – are points of consolidation of energy and purpose of that law, that <em>they are ontological or existential, having value in themselves</em>, and that they are not to be treated as techniques by which something else is realized in time through a process of operation. Forgetting this, we may commit an underestimation of what the Lord calls ‘My <em>yoga’</em>. It is a state of existence which has no orientation other than this. And if that is so, at any level of existence and operation, any element, function or impulse is in its purest form, and is a sample of being in its non-temporally eternal harmony (<em>śāśvata śānti – </em>18.62); that is, when effort is, but with no idea of a result, when work is not just physical, but has a glow of sentience, when sentience is, but is with an absorption which is never partial and individual but universal. Is it possible to achieve this by anyone at any single moment? If so, that seems to be the state (<em>yoga</em>) which the Lord speaks of as ‘His’. How can there be something beyond it, for Infinity is concentred therein? Perhaps, if we can have the picture of our bosom projected on a screen in a three dimensional fashion, and have a look at the elements constituted within and working, we may have the approximate vision which the Lord gave to Arjuna in which the individual is shown to be working within as an element, and shown how that element is being asked to acquire a condition of <em>Yoga</em> fulfilling the demands of the plan and purpose of the universe in which he finds himself.</p>
		<p>This is the demand of the Lord: to convert <em>karma</em> into a <em>Yoga</em>, <em>jñāna</em> into a <em>Yoga</em>, and <em>bhakti</em> into a <em>yoga</em>, where <em>yoga</em> is existential, where skill is natural, wisdom is the beacon light, absorption is the ticking breath, and undisturbed harmony is the law. This is a demand not to run for an end in the far off distance, but to convert each second of existence into an end in itself, and to treat each strife as the goal.</p>
		<p>When the Lord declared: “See My divine bountiful <em>Yoga</em>,” he gave us the first phenomenological intimation of a super existential or natural state. We are initiated into a pre-logical, pre-relational state wherein all the possible logical and relative quibbles fall out of their oppositions and find their natural or spontaneous resolution. One who comes to possess such a gifted eye to witness a state of natural harmony of things which are apparently contradictory is not only relieved of his logical doubts, but also overcomes an existential self-alienation, which constitutes his liberation. We shall see of this immediately.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
