<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-010">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">10</span>Liberation – Freedom  In Participation</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">A</span>gainst the background of the philosophy of cosmic consolidation of <em>yajña</em>, y<em>oga</em> and <em>karma </em>that has been set forth, the idea of liberation in the Gita turns out to be very unique and dynamic: liberation is life itself! If liberation, in the ordinary naïve sense, is an escape from life, and life a degenerate condition of the Self, the Gita presents a perspective which is the reverse. The expansion of the meaning of ‘life’ and ‘liberation’ here is so vast and basic that it is seldom grasped, and so, with that the significance of the active participation of an individual in the cosmic dialectics (which has set up every form of living or life) is lost sight of. One is brought in here to life to lead a life of liberation. For, the occasioning of life is according to a cosmic plan, and one who lives according to the plan is an instance of the cosmic truth fulfilled in freedom. This is exactly the opposite of the normal conception by which we think that one’s birth is only a fall from an original freedom and perfection.</p>
		<p>If life is living with Reality in a way that is <em>yoga</em>, ‘<em>yoga’ </em>standing for the most harmonious, most balanced way of a wholesome art, with a consciousness that none lives for himself, with the implication that that man’s being is built into the core of Reality of a self-regenerative sacrifice and continuity (<em>Yajña), </em>and with the demand that one to lead a trans-individual life at all times, the meaning of both ‘life’ and ‘liberation’ gets widened and clarified. Any significant life is to be in tune with this, and no liberation can be true liberation if this is forgotten. The hopes of a heaven hereafter, of getting into a <em>loka </em>after death, is perhaps foreign to the spirit of the teaching of the Lord. If one keeps track of the way the Lord asks anyone to be a <em>Yogī</em>, he finds Him ruling out the meaning of <em>mukti</em> as an eschatological ideal.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-018">16</a></sup>  The <em>svarga </em>(or heaven) the Lord offers to Arjuna to win by fighting is that of living well as demanded by the Cosmic Law (<em>svadharma </em>of a <em>kṣatriya</em>)<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-017">17</a></sup>  in a spirit that is <em>yajña</em>, and/or of dying a death, by which one does not reappear.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-016">18</a></sup>  The setting of this world in the scheme of things – the extent of which is, however, not to be limited to the geographical or global limits of our understanding – seems to be so planned that all divine functions can only be done here and that heaven is not elsewhere than in fulfilling one’s functions. In this unusually set world the Lord Himself commissions the fulfillment. This is a significant reversal of the common idea of escape from life, which is nurtured in ignorance.</p>
		<p>But this is not making the world much or making it the centre of all aspirations. The philosophy of the Gita is not materialism of the sort which considers nothing beyond the purely physical and mundane. By ‘world’ it only means the field of work (<em>kṣetra</em>)<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-015">19</a></sup>  and beyond that no materialistic import is to be found in the spirit of the Gita. The ‘material’, no doubt, is coterminous with the ‘spiritual’, but only from the point of view of life which is occasioned by the cosmic theme (13.19). According to the Gita, to live with matter, but not be <em>bound by it</em>, is the cue for a transcendental living, which is existence, and is the cue for understanding what liberation is. The Lord points out very significantly:</p>
		<p class="myquote">Whoever sees the secret of the Field and the Knower by the (intuitive) eye of wisdom, and the way of freedom from the elements of Nature goes to the highest limits of being (13.34).</p>
		<p>This is transcendental living in which the distinction between the subject and the object is clearly kept in view, but both are kept engaged in the service of the cosmic theme. It is also transcendental living, where transcendence is not going beyond or escaping the field of cosmic dynamics. With reference to the Lord Himself, there is the transcendental life, wherein He lives with <em>prakṛti</em>, for it is His nature (<em>svabhāvo adhyātmaṃ ucyate – </em>8.3). Understood thus, perhaps we have here an unparalleled conception of what constitutes life in its most divine or metaphysical sense, far beyond the physical or biological living. The Lord is the symbol of this unique metaphysical living in which His <em>svabhāva</em> is never His master, but acts at His beck and call (<em>prakṛtim svāmavaṣṭabhya visṛjāmi – </em>9.8), and works under the direction of the Lord (<em>mayādhyakṣhena prakṛtim sūyate – 9.10). </em>Can we understand this perspective of life and mastery? If so, we will have understood what liberation is in its most comprehensive, trans-individual and transcendental sense.</p>
		<p>It is on this pattern the individual being is expected to <em>live</em> and <em>be</em> in liberation. And there has been a recurrent theme in the Gita which tells us that the physical and the values that are physical – the lure of matter – should always be set at naught (<em>indriyārtheṣu vairāgyaṃ</em> – 13.8). In fact, the entire philosophy of the Gita centres round the theme of understanding what constitutes the root of all Reality hidden beyond this gross materiality (<em>yoga māyā samāvṛtaḥ</em> – 8.25), a materiality which always throws a screen of delusion on the ignorant (7.15). A direction is given to discover the transcendental existence (<em>paraṃ bhāva</em>) beyond the smokescreen that materiality throws around. To attain the condition of <em>param bhāva </em>is salvation, but this is not a hereafter or a hypothetical condition of a heaven. To cut the veil of <em>māyā</em> of the <em>guṇas</em> and to participate in Reality is the same as being in the <em>brāhmī sthiti</em> associated with the life of a <em>sthita-prajña.</em></p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
