<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-011">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">11</span>The Human Example</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter"><strong>T</strong></span>he concept of liberation in the Gita is to be understood from two concrete illustrations available in the text itself – one is that of Krishna, the transcendental Lord Himself, and two, that of Janaka, a human being implied in the text as serving the best example of a <em>sthitaprajña</em>.</p>
		<p>At the level of the Lord, who is the transcendental principle, the source of all being, life consists in being everywhere and being within everything, and liberation consists in not being subjected or tainted. This is transcendental or metaphysical life and liberation, and the Lord elaborates them in great detail and emphasis (8<sup>th</sup> and 13<sup>th</sup> chapters). We shall be devoting ourselves to this in the next section.</p>
		<p>But, for the present, we shall consider what it means to live and have liberation at the human level, as exemplified by a person, a <em>sthitaprajña</em> of the type of Janaka. However, the best prelude to the understanding of the state called <em>sthita- prajñatva</em> is to clarify it in terms of what is called <em>samādhi</em>, a state, which is more often mistaken for quietude or, in a lesser sense, inactivity, as in a person – with no prejudice to his evolved condition – who may be in meditation and lost in it, but pinned down to a static position. For all practical purposes, the stativity of one in <em>samādhi</em> is physical, but not the whole of it. To be more precise, it does not touch the core of what constitutes the essence of <em>samādhi</em>. For the Gita, <em>samādhi</em> is a state of full awakenness or awareness. It is the attention fixed in the <em>theoria</em> or the truth of the Self or Existence. It is consciousness not getting split by the divisions in the objective world. And a person in that state is all active (if ‘activity’ means anything physical) like any one of us. He eats, speaks, walks, and so on (5.8-9), but with an orientation completely different and not available with us who may be constantly doing all those things.</p>
		<p>This state of <em>samādhi,</em> to which the Lord refers, is not simply a possible experience of a philosopher’s conception of an experience always ‘around the corner’, but is an <em>actual</em> one lived here. One who has risen to that level lives in the immediate presence of Brahman or Reality (<em>brahma saṃsparśa</em> – 6.28). It is an experience available here, and one is ‘lost’ in it (<em>abhito brahma nirvāṇaṃ</em> – 6.26). He is a person whose consciousness is turned into a transcendental condition (<em>paraṃ bhāva</em>), which ordinary imagination fails to grasp. As contrasted with one who is in <em>brahma yoga </em>(5.21), those who are after <em>kāma</em> (desire) speak of only <em>svarga</em> (heaven) as an idea and wish to be born there; and so, they perform many and varied rituals seeking pleasure and comfort (2.43). This is desire for life <em>unconnected</em> with Reality, such as life lived by those who do not have intuitions of the Real. The significance of the Lord’s statement: <em>dharmāviruddho kāmo’smi</em> (7.11), is lost sight of by us. It is <em>kāma</em> or desire in consonance with <em>dharma</em>, the Universal Law of Being. At this stage, and in this capacity, <em>kāma</em> becomes universal love as expressed in the other statements of the Lord: “with no ill-will to any being, being friendly and compassionate, with no attachment and with nothing like selfishness” (12.12); and “with no hatred toward any existent” (11.15). And all this flowing from an understanding that the principle of <em>dharma</em> exists in all equally (6.31). The reward for such living in tune with Reality is peace, the aspiration of all aspirations (2.71), which a <em>sthitaprajña</em> or a <em>Yogī </em>has in abundance.</p>
		<p>There is yet another point which may require mention here. There has been a reference, no doubt, to a ‘travel’ through <em>uttarāyaṇa</em> or <em>dakṣiṇāyana</em>, or through <em>śukla</em> or <em>kṛṣṇa</em> paths (the northern and the southern, or the white and the black paths, 8.24-25). But these do not suggest a crossing over a distance to attain a place of one’s highest aspiration. Even in the passages where they do occur, the end that has been laid down is symbolic and suggestive of the dynamic philosophy of cosmic consolidation wherein all are absorbed (the living and the dead) and assimilated into the being of Infinity, which, as being, ever <em>is</em>, and is an ever inexhaustible ideal. It is said that one who travels by the ‘black’ path (both literally and metaphorically) is reborn, <em>i.e.</em>, gets back his physical body (<em>āvartate punaḥ – </em>8.26), for obviously, it has not served the purpose or is not utilised well while living; and one who travels by the ‘white’ path (both literally and metaphorically) is assimilated into the dynamics of Reality, or becomes Reality itself, and is not reborn, <em>i.e.,</em> does not come back to have a body in a physical context (<em>yāti anāvṛttiṃ</em> – 8.26). It is the end that is not physical, but an end to be the basis of all that is physical, and an end to be the power which keeps or sustains the physical. It becomes the real living force which sustains the universe and is not subordinate to it (<em>jīvabhūtāṃ yayedaṃ dhāryate jagat</em> – 7.5) – call it the cosmic law (<em>prakṛtīṃ parāṃ – </em>7.5) or the Lord’s nature (<em>adhyātma</em>), it is immaterial. This is the life of Spirit, which is liberation.</p>
		<p>If we are to understand this picture of Reality and life in the manner we have tried to do, it would be easier for us to grasp the import of liberation as active participation in its dynamics, which is to be attained by living a life of the Spirit rather than that of a carnal body, and by living up to a purpose that is cosmic beyond the logos of private existence. Such people are the <em>Yogī</em>s or the ‘always liberated’ (<em>sadā muktaḥ – </em>5.28).</p>
		<p> With this preliminary or basic understanding of what constitutes life and liberation at both trans-individual (or cosmic: <em>parā</em>) and individual (<em>iha</em>) levels, it would be interesting to know how a <em>sthitaprajña</em> as a living human individual keeps up in his life a running bond between the two realms of his own being, the transcendental or the non-relative and the empirical or the relative, and always keeps clear of the snares that the latter may throw on a person. A <em>sthitaprajña</em> presents a reflection in him, or is himself an epitome, of the Cosmic Person, living here with the physical, yet undaunted by the empirical contingencies of life. He stands for one who is a master in managing the affairs of life, viz. matter and spirit, in a way in which his spirit is not cowed down, and he lives above the dualities among which he lives, but is not caught up by their snares. Not allowing himself to be a slave of instinct or impulse (sensual or emotional), he is the master who causes the mind to serve him (2.64), for it is the mind which is the ‘enemy on the way’ to be controlled (2.60, 67).</p>
		<p>Rooted in the unity of the Self and finding all fulfillments in it (<em>ātmanye atmanā tuṣṭaḥ</em>, 2.55), he sees across pain and pleasure, and through hatred and love, and rises above them, for he is established on the bedrock of equanimity natural to the Self, which has found its depths or dimensions, as it were (12.16-19). He has <em>ātma prasāda</em>, and his mind is <em>prasanna</em> (2.64, 65). This is being in peace with oneself, and on the strength and illumination of it he sees peace outside (2.66). This is the metaphysical awakening (i.e. real <em>jñāna</em> which the Lord calls ‘<em>jñāna-vijñāna</em>), which is beyond the merely psychological in which the mind functions with the aid of the <em>indriyas</em> and passes for a state of consciousness (<em>jāgrat</em>), which it is really not. The Lord asks us to discover the real principle of consciousness which is always awake beyond the wakeful and sleeping states. And it is in this sense that the <em>sthitaprajña</em> is called an instance of a consciousness fully and always awake, <em>i.e.,</em> operating at all times, but with a natural mastery over all that is purely material and worldly. Under the illuminations of this awakened condition, the polarity or parallelism of the mind faking itself as the principle of consciousness is broken. That is, it is not made to act <em>as</em> the Self, but <em>for</em> the Self. Thus broken of its vital existence, the dichotomizing effect of the mind is subdued, and for the person thus awakened metaphysically the “night of the ordinary folk is day, and the day of the ordinary is night” (2.69). That is, he sees the truth when others are blind to it, and when others indulgingly see, he is withdrawn (2.58). This is an evaluational attitude of a <em>sthitaprajña</em> who has discovered the most basic standard by which all the empirical and contingent is judged. From the awareness that he has, he orders and groups things in life, fixes their interrelations amongst themselves and with Reality, but keeps himself away from the entanglements of the lower existents and values.</p>
		<p>Thus a <em>sthitaprajña</em> is one whose <em>prajña</em> or awareness is in a state of unaffected chastity or purity with regard to both truth and existence, and while he exists in life, he is unaffected by its divisions and dualities. In other words, leading a life with us, he shows what it is to be a master and not a slave to life. The indifference (<em>udāsīnatva </em>or <em>anāsakti</em>) that such a person is found to be showing towards the world and its forms does not stem from a weakness, but arises from a strength which helps him ably to manage them. He is <em>dakṣa</em> or strong (12.16) where others are weak, he is steady (<em>sthita</em>) where others are shaky. Free from all desires of a carnal nature, he moves about untouched by any egoistic taint and verily qualifies himself to a state of peace (2.71). This is liberation or freedom, for it is the life of the Spirit in which the Spirit lives as Spirit and never as something else.</p>
		<p>For a superficial eye the teaching of the Gita, in this aspect, may seem to be one that advocates asceticism or escapism hardly relevant to the situation where dynamism is needed. But for a deeper understanding, this asceticism of a <em>sthitaprajña</em> is no asceticism of a weak-minded man, but of a strong man who has risen above the strongest of infatuations, the pulls of personal gains and losses, and of personal glory and power. It is the symbol of the power of equanimity over the weakness of will and mind, which ultimately leads to a disaster even the non-ascetic cannot invite on himself (2.62-63). An activism that does not have an inner calm is bound to bluster away into withering, and the calmness (<em>śānti, manaḥ-prasāda, prasanna-citta</em>) that characterizes the <em>sthitaprajña</em> is the symbol of the power hidden underneath. It is a calmness that comes with truth, a calmness which can bear all the flutter of the world, including its destruction!</p>
		<p>And, with regard to pessimism ascribed as a characteristic of the ‘indifferent’ <em>sthitaprajña</em>, it is again a misunderstanding of the state of being in which he is. It is not only that the transcendental state of the Lord is missed by such ascriptions, but the state in which the <em>sthitaprajña</em> lives transcendentally and functions passes beyond the comprehension of such estimates. It is forgotten that here is an awakened person (a <em>jāgartī</em> – 2.69) who is fully aware of the course of things beyond the horizons of ordinary perception. </p>
		<p>Not that a <em>sthitaprajña</em> is pessimistic nor that he lacks initiative, but being an active participant in the hidden dialectics of Reality, he is not to begin a work afresh, for he has begun it long ago. The significance of the Lord’s statement, <em>sarvārambha parityāgī,</em> is lost on us (12.16; 14.25). He picks up a work and only continues it, for in the logos of the Cosmic consolidation the work is going on, and what is the beginning of it? Perhaps, there is no beginning! Can we understand this meaning hidden in the bowels of the Law of Infinity? The understanding of <em>sthitaprajña</em> crosses through the divisions of time (like the Lord Himself – 2.12) by which alone the ordinary mortal measures himself and all his activity. He, in his cloistered vision between one’s temporal birth and death of the body (2.18), thinks a work is begun by him at a time and finished at a particular time. But the <em>sthitaprajña</em> knows and sees that no work is ended in the dynamics of existence. This is a consciousness of continuity running through moments called ‘individualities’ (2.20, 22) on the canvas of Infinity.</p>
		<p>And, with regard to the feeling that overruns the mind which thinks that all endeavour or effort is going to be absorbed in the final vacuity of a predestined scheme, it should be said that such a feeling sadly misses the point. For nothing is absorbed and made effete, but is built up into a larger whole which gathers mass and meaning in the shape of the cosmic theme working itself up (<em>nehābhikrama nāśosti pratyavāyo na vidyate</em> – 2.40). The Lord assures us that in this scheme no life is lived in vain. For the best in each species, the Lord says, is His manifestation (<em>vibhūti</em>) and is the result of a multifaceted sacrifice. If once we understand the subtle shades of the description of the Lord’s glorious province (see the <em>Vibhūti Yoga</em>), we come out with a sense of fulfillment far beyond our isolated and individual existence. We realize that we are a continuation of the past, that we have assimilated into our present and individual being the sacrifice of the millions, or of our own previous births, and that we continue into the future. </p>
		<p>With this understanding, we may come up to live a life of hope with a sense of fulfillment. In the scheme of cosmic consolidation no work is individual, nor is it begun individually. No achievement is individual, nor does it come to an end shattered against the walls of predestination. Whoever understands infinite life (2.16-30) understands the state of a <em>sthitaprajña</em> as surpassing evaluations by the temporal and empirical standards, even as the ways of the cosmic or the divine law cannot be submitted to these standards.</p>
		<p>We find in the Gita a significant equation made of a <em>sthitaprajña</em> with a <em>Yogi</em>, a <em>bhakta </em>or a <em>jñāni</em> in the true sense. They are interchangeable terms, and this is true with regard to those in whom the ideal of liberation has found its actualisation. We find in such a person a rare instance of an ideal, realisation and being coinciding indivisibly. The insight of the Gita as to what constitutes liberation is to be seen in the descriptions of the life that such people are shown to live.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-019">20</a></sup>  We have already noted much of this description, but how they assess the world of their living, the values empirical and material, and how they live among them yet untouched by them is significant for us to know. Standing on the bedrock of essential truth – call it <em>ātman</em> (Self) or <em>Brahman</em> (Infinity) – they know what is relative or contingent and see them as such, allow them to play, but not taking anything from them or taken in by them. For them the earth is there, but the lure of it is gone; relativity is there, but its necessity is overcome. This is the power of the Spirit over matter, the devaluation of the latter’s strength to involve the Spirit. It is the mastery of the Spirit over the necessity of the object and the consequent enslavement of it.</p>
		<p>That liberation of a person is not to be sought beyond the physical death is the implication of the person called <em>sthitaprajña</em>, described as being in the <em>brāhmī sthiti</em>. Hardly do we understand this. We ought to know that physical death is not the evidence of liberation, and that the physical is not the only death. Any liberation that is hoped to be achieved after physical death (<em>videha mukti</em>) is to be evidenced here and proved against bondage, or else, it becomes simply hypothetical.</p>
		<p>Against the background of the philosophy of the Gita, wherein the existence of matter is not denied, the picture of a <em>sthitaprajña</em> stands out proclaiming to us that liberation is not from the relationship between the Spirit as the subject and the matter of the world as the object (one aspect of it is one’s physical body), but from the necessity of such a relationship for the basic existence of the Spirit. The feeling of necessity is bondage and overcoming it is liberation. In the dualism (as one may be inclined to infer from the Gita) of the Lord and His <em>Kāyā</em>, the element of His dependence on <em>Māyā</em> is purely contingent and not necessary for the being of the Lord. It should be so even at the individual level, as is evidenced in the life of a <em>sthitaprajña,</em> who is free from the necessity of the contingent and the relative, while he is yet with them.</p>
		<p>A <em>sthitaprajña</em> is an instance of the Spirit which from out of its fundamental experience of the unity of being fuses, as it were, his physical body with the rest of the world of objects even while living with it. This is the significance of <em>brahma nirvāṇa</em>. And, so, one in that situation does not find a necessity in consciousness to treat his body as having a being different from the rest of the objects even while he sees, hears, touches, smells, eats, goes about, sleeps, speaks, throws, grasps, opens, closes, and so on (5.8-9). This is freedom he will have gained from the physical body, and the unnecessity of treating it as different from the rest of the world, which, again, goes on in a similar mechanical way. The essential law of life of a <em>sthitaprajña</em> is that he has no individualised body as distinct from the cosmic material, and this equally refers to his attitude towards the unity of his individual self with that of the universal. This identity is so much achieved by him <em>in life</em> that we, because of our attachment or enslavement to our own body, argue about his physical body – a lump of matter, as he treats it – which has been released by him as of no consequence! It is no more than a carcass for him who is freed from the necessity of it. The fact that such a liberated self lives among us, with a physical body hanging about him, should be a great blessing to us, for we, who are bound to the necessity of the body, can have a physical contact with him, and have the benefit of his example and intuitions to know with conviction how an individual can live as a factor of cosmic design and serve to consolidate its purpose. This we forget unfortunately and think that he lives like us confined to that body, not seeing the infinite dimension of his growth beyond the physical frame.</p>
		<p>At one point the Lord suggests that liberation is not simply from gross matter, but should be from the subtle as well (2.59). This is the mental or the egoistic aspect. Freedom from the mind and the ego has been a repeated theme of the Lord’s instruction, and the <em>sthitaprajña</em> or a <em>Yogī</em> is one who is liberated from these bonds even though he is found with the physical body. He is with the body – <em>sthūla</em> and <em>sūkṣma</em> – and free from the bondage of their limitations. That he is free is to be seen in the way he lives his life. He stands to be witnessed by anyone as having a changed vision or a heightened vision (<em>paraṃ dṛṣṭvā</em> – 2.59).</p>
		<p>Liberation, especially that of one’s liberation-in-life (<em>jīvanmukti</em>), has a direct bearing on the thesis of <em>loka-saṃgraha,</em> understood in its widest connotation, viz<em>.</em> as consolidation of the cosmic purpose. A <em>sthitaprajña</em> who is in a <em>brahmī sthiti</em> represents in his way of life what it actually means, viz. a cosmic theme of a movement in the direction of the Infinite working through the individual and society, a theme of which the <em>sthitaprajña</em> is conscious, but not so the others. Not only is he conscious of his position in society and the rest of the cosmos, but he also knows that each man is placed thus. It is this cosmic theme which works up also the division of men into classes (2.13) on the basis of a natural law with a purpose of effecting a consolidation in the smoothest way possible. And, apart from this social classification, the cosmic law demands men to pursue duties in life (3.8) in accordance with the classification, to be devoted to that pattern however harsh and uncongenial the life and duties may be (3.35), and to attain salvation by holding fast to that pattern (3.20; 18.45). The individual himself has to tread this path of serving a cosmic purpose and be himself an instance in his life of a cosmic purpose attaining fruition. A <em>sthita-prajña </em>is the measure of the capacity of man to effect <em>lokasaṃgraha</em> or consolidation in one’s own life and being a stage himself in the direction of its fulfillment. He is an example to society demonstrating that the future of life is linked up with the cosmos in a positive relationship, a relationship which does not stop with the individual and the local, but extends even to the living and non-living existents beyond the narrow, selfish fortifications of ordinary living.</p>
		<p>Liberation is a condition of one’s being or existence not involved in relativity or in its implications of space, time, finitude, etc. Not reducing the world and its associated features to an abstract nothing, liberation implies a realisation of the most basic truth behind all experience, with reference to which it recognizes the worth of the world as simply of a relative nature. Ultimately, liberation has an existential import, even as the Self has, and one may go to the extent of saying that it would be a contradiction to speak of a self that ‘attains’ freedom, for a self that is not naturally free is no Self at all. Self and liberation are co-terminous or interchangeable existents.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
