<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-001">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">12</span>The Infinite Being  – Its Dynamics  And Freedom</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">T</span>he most difficult yet pivotal concept in the Lord’s teaching is about His Infinite Being referred to in personal tones as <em>parama puruṣa</em>, <em>puruṣottama</em> or <em>uttama puruṣa</em>. The infinite dynamics of that Being is referred to in the Gita as <em>paraṃ-bhāva</em>. In fact, the only problem that exists before the human being is to understand the dimensions of <em>parama puruṣa</em> and the dynamics of <em>paraṃ bhāva</em>, both hidden in a mystery. The Lord says that one who unravels the mystery attains to the highest condition of the Infinite Being itself. It is termed variously <em>ātma-māyā</em>, <em>yoga-māyā,</em> etc<em>.</em> and could be rendered only as ‘mystery’. Its inscrutableness is brought out by the Lord’s statement that “it is very difficult to (grasp it) and escape from its hold or transgress its Law” (7.14). This mystery runs all through and touches the being of the Infinite in all its transcendent and immanent aspects, and is also at the basis of all failures in describing the Infinite through words, for it is attempting to express something which transcends all verbal communication, let alone mental comprehension. It is that which baffles all rational analysis and construction. Where we think we are in possession of it, it will have eluded us. “Wonderful,” is the only description, and ‘Wonderful’ is the only expression and reaction towards it (2.29).</p>
		<p>It is usual to translate the term <em>paraṃ</em> in <em>parama puruṣa</em> as ‘transcendent’. But this may convey the sense of mere transcendence creating a feeling of distance. A being that is transcendent this way is hardly comprehensive. In the case of the Infinite, transcendence should imply existence beyond a certain sense of immanence. Hence immanence is as much a character of transcendences. The highest being cannot be just transcendent, but should be immanent also. And so, <em>paraṃ</em> is to be understood as the Infinite Being, implying both transcendence and immanence, for the limits of immanence are not the limits of being, and it is this which transcendence implies.</p>
		<p>Now with regard to <em>puruṣa</em>, it is usual to take it as a person, thereby giving it a personal touch. But there is a greater reason in understanding it as the existential principle in its most universal and impersonal character, as the ‘<em>Being</em> resident in all beings’, and as the ‘Primal sentience and will’ (<em>jñātṛ</em> and <em>kratu</em>, respectively). For being the Infinite, nothing can be besides it, both in extension and intension.</p>
		<p><em>Puruṣa</em> is <em>puri śayate</em>. This Being is spoken of as <em>Kṣetrī </em>(13.33), for he resides in all <em>kṣetras,</em> i.e. all bodies (13.2). Naturally, in tune with the Infinite, we will have to reckon: as is the Infinite, so is the <em>kṣetra</em>. In its transcendent and immanent character, the Infinite <em>kṣetrī</em> is in Infinite <em>kṣetra</em>. This is because there is no point where the Infinite is not, and there cannot be a <em>kṣetra</em> without a <em>kṣetrī, </em>and vice versa. The dynamics of the Infinie Being (<em>ātma-yoga</em>) is such that to bifurcate it as the <em>kṣetra</em> and the <em>kṣetrī</em> is merely verbal, and any distinction between them existentially conceiving one as the spiritual and the other as the non-spiritual would be logically inconsistent. It is exactly in this sense that the Veda speaks of it: <em>puruṣa eva idaṃ sarvaṃ</em> (“<em>Puruṣa</em> is all this verily”). Whatever that <em>is</em>, pulsates with the living touch of <em>Puruṣa, </em>and there cannot be an <em>idaṃ</em> (this) without <em>puruṣa</em> being in it, <em>puruṣa</em> not being it. Keeping this dimension of the Infinite in view, we will have to examine the problem of transcendence and immanence with reference to time and space or time-space, or broadly, the empirical context.</p>
		<p>There are many statements in the Gita which convey immanence and all-pervasiveness of the Infinite Being:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Īśvaraḥ sarva bhūtānāṃ hṛddese tiṣṭhati (in the hearts of all existents, the Īśwara exists – 18.61).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Samaṃ sarveṣu bhūtānāṃ tiṣṭhantaṃ (who exists in all beings – 13.27).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Ena sarvaṃ idaṃ tataṃ (by which all this is pervaded – 8.22).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Vāsudevaḥ sarvaṃ iti (all this is Vāsudeva – 7.19).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Tvayā tataṃ viśvaṃ anantarūpaṃ (the infinite form of existence is pervaded by Thee – 11.38).</em></p>
		<p>Are we to understand by these descriptions that the Infinite pervades spatially, as we are prone to do? We are easily stuck, if we are to bring in the imagery of spatial pervasion or occupation of the type we witness in empirical experience, say, of water entering the pores of a sponge and being there, or the pervasion of ink on a paper when it is spilt, or the pervasion of light or air in a room. Is the Infinite immanent in this way? If we yield to the temptation and say yes, we are treating it as a commensurable entity understandable in terms of our knowledge. We have then a commensurate Infinite. What we forget in our ignorance is the fact of its transcendence, i.e. it does not fit into the spatial application. Immanence is ontological, not linguistic or literal, and points to a basic existence of the Infinite as the metaphysical ground and being of all existence. If it is spatially pervasive, as in the case of ink spreading on a paper, when we cut the paper, we will have cut the Infinite too! And so, any pervasiveness of the Infinite will have to be understood metaphorically, if we are not to affect the existential and non-logical implication of the immanence of the Infinite.</p>
		<p>How about transcendence? It cannot be different. We find in the Gita statements which convey the sense that the entire extent of the universe empirically available to us forms only a fragment of the Lord’s splendor, springing out and supported by a fragment; and that the Infinite itself has no beginning, no middle and no end (11.19). “There is nothing that is equal, how can there be something greater?” (<em>na tvat samah asti, abhyadhikaḥ</em> <em>kutaḥ?</em> – 11.43). The Infinite is so incommensurate that nothing we think of can be a match to it, and our choosing a metaphor or example from what we know can only be a pathetic show. At best it can suggest, but it will not give us the feel of the unequalled Incommensurate. The dimensions of this Incommensurate Infinite are so surpassing that the whole of the universe looked so pitifully small to Arjuna who saw it lodged in a small nook of the ‘body’ of the Supreme Lord (11.13). Arjuna was so bewildered and dumfounded at the expanse of the Infinite that he pleads for a restoration of his normalcy. However, we should not be misled by the imagery of the body of the Supreme Being.</p>
		<p>That which spreads beyond the extent of the universe is not spatial. Does the Infinite transcend the given in a way that a nose sticks out of one’s face or in a way a lotus sticks out of the surface of a lake? These are spatial and commensurate examples, and any extension of the Infinite in this way makes it commensurate with space. The Vedic statement: <em>pādosya viśwā bhūtāni, tripadasyā aṃṛtaṃ divi</em>, should not be taken to mean that the three quarters of the <em>Puruṣa</em> are spread out in ‘space immortal’, the space in relation to our space-time conception. In the same way, the figure of the <em>Viśwarūpa</em> understood in terms of spatial extension or dimension is a poor attempt to grasp the non-spatial Incommensurate (<em>aprameya </em>–11.42).</p>
		<p>In the same way, the transcendence and immanence of the Infinite should not be understood in terms of the time we know. For the dynamics of the Infinite, even here, is incommensurate to the extent that it will make all our metaphors effete. The mystery or this <em>aprameyatva</em> is well revealed by innumerable statements in the Gita, and we may find samples of such thus:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>What is outside is also inside. </em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>It is everywhere, in all, but nothing touches it. </em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Nothing contaminates it. </em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>It moves and it moves not. </em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>There is nothing that it does, but there is nothing that is not done by it. </em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>It is indivisible but found equally (and in equal intensity) in all divided things. </em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>It is itself, it is the other too.</em></p>
		<p>Is it mathematically countable as ‘one’ or ‘many’? Its existence or pervasion is inscrutable (<em>avyaktaṃ – </em>9.4;<em> māyā – </em>18.61; <em>rahasyaṃ – </em>4.3). Its mysterious dynamics is deepened and intensified when we are told:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>All things exist in It, and they do not exist in It (9.4-5). </em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>All things exist in It, but It is not in them! (9.4).</em></p>
		<p>How to understand this, which, though not contradictory for an Infinite logic, is so for human logic? The Infinite is its own law by which it can be its very opposite in a dialectic of ‘super-identity’ (<em>ekasthaṃ</em> – 13.30) which transcends all oppositions of ordinary logic (11.7; 3.30). It tells to our face: “Look at my beautiful Yoga” (<em>paśya me yogamaiśwaraṃ</em> – 9.5; 11.8). The logical mind is baffled by the contradictions it finds there: the macro being the micro, the Infinite being the finite, the far being the near, the spiritual being the material, and so on. But the non-logical or translogical is simply drawn towards its mystery and loses itself in this numinous truth! There can only be one response to it, i.e. horripilations at the sight of the Mysterious (11.14) and a cry “How Wonderful (2.29)!” </p>
		<p>Can we pierce through the mystery by considering a metaphor just as a metaphor, and so, only as a means of gauging the mystery behind the metaphor, or are we to remain caught up by the literal meaning of the metaphor and equate the Incommensurate with the commensurate of our knowing? We are committing the error that we are to avoid, if we interpret the verse:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Divi sūryasahasrasya bhaved yugapadutthitā yadi bhāḥ sadṛśī sā syādbhāsāstasya mahātmanaḥ – (11.12).</em><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-022">21</a></sup> </p>
		<p>as meaning “increase the kilo-wattage of one Sun to a thousand times and you get the required brilliance!” It is just a metaphor, and the truth is just incomprehensible.</p>
		<p>The numinous that is spoken of here is <em>akṣara</em>, <em>avibhakta</em>, <em>avikārya</em>, <em>abhedya</em>, <em>avyaya,</em> etc. But in what way? It is <em>akṣara, </em>not in the sense that an ingot of gold kept in a place does not disintegrate; it is <em>avibhakta,</em> not in a sense that something is hard to divide; <em>avikārya,</em> not in the sense that a certain thing refuses to be converted or transformed; <em>acchedya</em> and <em>avyaya,</em> not in the sense that something cannot be cut into pieces or is imperishable. The dialectic of the Infinite is not of the language we are familiar with. Can we rise to the state of understanding what is <em>aprameya</em> (unknowable, incommensurate) in terms of <em>prameya</em> (knowable, commensurate)? If we think we can, we are just deep in the net of a mystery, and never can we escape from it. It is not an exaggeration if the Lord speaks to us thus:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Those who are ignorant do not know Me who has taken up this human form. They do not understand My transcending state of dialectics (paraṃ bhāva). I am the Supreme Lord of all existence (not a creature born) – 9.11.</em></p>
		<p>The transcending state is too transcendent for human comprehension. The limits of knowledge can never be the limits of being. It is not strange, then, that whenever the Lord touches upon His transcendent state He repeats this warning (7.24-25).</p>
		<p>Finally, ‘transcendence’ is not limited to either the qualitative or the quantitative senses with which we are familiar. Its connotation with reference to the incommensurate should naturally far exceed the meaning and application of this term (or even of ‘immanence’) current in human usage. It is <em>sat</em> and transcends in <em>sat</em>; it is <em>cit</em> and transcends in<em> cit</em>; it is <em>ānanda </em>and transcends in <em>ānanda</em>. This is transcending transcendence (<em>paraṃ bhāva</em>) whose dialectics when applied to immanence transcends the immanence in <em>sat</em>, <em>cit</em>, and <em>ānanda</em>. This is the implication of the Infinite metaphysics the Lord wants us to intuit when He declares that the region or limits of immanence is out of a manifestation of an infinitesimally microscopic quantum of the transcending Being that He is (10.42).</p>
		<p>Not being commensurate in terms of space and time or any determinant of the type, yet being pervasive; and being pervasive, yet not being tainted is the mystery of the transcendental Being described by the Lord as <em>yoga-māyā</em> (mystery of the state of transcendental existence). It is by this the Lord ‘sits’ (<em>tiṣṭhati</em>) in all beings, but not physically; ‘supports’ (<em>bibharti</em>), yet not physically; ‘shines’ (<em>bhāsayate</em>), yet not like a physical luminary; ‘knows’ (<em>vetti</em>), yet not psychologically. The means and methods of the infinite ‘doing’ or ‘not doing’ these are invisible (<em>avyaktaṃ</em>), unthinkable (<em>acintyaṃ</em>) and indefinable (<em>anirdeśyaṃ</em>). Transcendent to the commensurate, it is yet the cause of the commensurate. This is the mystery (<em>yoga-māyā</em>). It is the way it exists!</p>
		<p>It is pertinent then to remember what is implied in the dynamics of Self-existence (<em>ātma yoga</em>), i.e. that whenever we speak of immanence or transcendence there is a case of hypostatization. Existentially the idea of immanence is a hypostatization of the finite on the Infinite. It arises as a result of the presupposition of the existence of the finite as such, but accommodating the Infinite as a pervading entity within and about, and so is an anathema to an Infinite Existence (11.11, 16, 38, 47). The entire eleventh chapter is devoted to the description of this Infinite Existence. For, it makes for the pervaded as distinct from the pervading. As within the limits, we think, we exist, we invite the Infinite to enter in terms of immanence so beyond the limits of where we think we do not exist, and allow the extension of the Infinite in terms of transcendence. Evidently, the basis for determining immanence or transcendence is the hypothesis of the finite existent, and therefore is relative. Thus the Infinite itself cannot justifiably be described as immanent or transcendent, or as both. It can only be an eternal, undivided existence, consciousness and bliss. This is the ‘truth-constant’ of reality, which the Lord is, and we should not miss it.</p>
		<p>If, then, the dynamics of the Infinite Being is ungraspable and mysterious, the problem arises as to how else are we to intuit its being and dimensions.</p>
		<p>There could only be one way, and that is, through intuiting the dimensions it brings into being and sets into motion within the commensurable limits of our being, but revealed to our consciousness during the attunement of our being with it. However, the idea of our being is to be understood conditionally.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-021">22</a></sup>  For, nothing is brought into being in the realm or being of the Infinite. And any point of being that we may feel as ours can only be an instance of our inviting the whole of the Infinite to lend us a self-feeling, when we think we exist and operate. We forget that it is only the dialectics of the infinite <em>kṣetrī</em> in the <em>kṣetra</em>. </p>
		<p>Even within the conditional field of self-feeling there are subtle shades which pass beyond metaphor and example, and therefore, our understanding can only be a limited human approach to the Infinite Reality; and beyond the human what exists of Reality we may not be able to know at all. And so, the pointed demand of the Infinite Being on man is one of absolute humility or a demand to reduce one’s self to naught. The real implication of absorption or surrender is this dissolution of our being in the Being of the Infinite whereby the pretensions of parallel existence or anti-existence are ruled out. I am not, It is. The dialectic of Its being is the theme of the Lord’s teaching set forth in the <em>Puruṣottama Yoga</em>. And any element that comes up in the explanation is just incidental to the exposition of the dialectics of Its being, not that the element which has been brought in has a being of its own. In other words, the consideration of the elements like <em>puruṣa</em> and <em>prakṛti</em> has reference beyond them, and any being they get is because of their participation in Its dynamics. We shall see of this in the next section.</p>
		<p>But before we pass on to consider these dimensions (<em>vistāraṃ</em> – 13.30) of the Infinite, we will have to bear in mind that any relationship the Transcendent Being is said to possess with regard to them should not be confused with ordinary relationships available in empirical experience. Expressions like <em>mātā</em>, <em>pitā</em>, <em>dhātā</em>, <em>pitāmahā</em>, <em>bhartā</em>, <em>prabhu</em>, <em>sākṣi</em>, <em>suhṛt</em>, <em>nivāsa</em>, <em>upadṛṣṭa</em>, <em>anumantā</em>, <em>kṣetrajña</em>, etc. used in this context are metaphors having meanings beyond the personal implications of such terms used by us. It is a relationship that is not commensurate with the empirical husband-wife relationship, master-servant relationship, and so on. It is ontological and refers to the being of the Infinite in its transcendent and immanent characters. The relationship indicates a transcendental logic and dialectics of the Infinite, which bind ‘all this’ with the Infinite in a way in which the Infinite is not bound with ‘all this’.</p>
		<p>As an ideal of comprehension, the Infinite is <em>avijñeya</em>, yet it is end of all knowledge, <em>jñeya</em>. There is an obvious logical antithesis here, but the invitation is held out that it is <em>jñeya-gamya</em> (13.17) on the ontological dialectics of the absolute whose nature is to transcend the oppositions of logical dialectics, yet be revealed as the very soul of all beings. The mystery is whatever oppositions the dichotomizing empirical reasoning or logic may find in the facts of experience, they are resolved into a higher or transcending unity at the level of the Infinite, so that each ‘opposing’ (as ordinarily understood) aspect works in such perfect ‘togetherness’ that to have a doubt itself of their mutual anti-thesis would be virtually wrong. The dynamics of the Infinite Being gives us the indication of how very unfortunate and misdirecting it is to establish the thesis-antithesis movement of the logical dialectics and transport it into a field which is governed by a different dialectics.</p>
		<p>The dynamics of the Infinite Being can be intelligible to us only when we find its application with reference to a concrete instance, viz.<em> jīvaloka</em> or the sphere of life, which is a dimension projected by the Infinite Lord before our consciousness.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-020">23</a></sup>  Its study is relevant for an accurate understanding of the issue, and so, occupies us immediately in the following section, which is virtually a continuation of the present one.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
