<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-013">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">13</span>The Infinite Theme In Application</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">I</span>n a very significant verse the Lord makes the basic demand for understanding the Infinite Theme in application. He says:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>yadābhūtapṛthagbhāvam ekasthaṃ anupaśyati |</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>tata eva ca vistāraṃ brahma saṃpadyate tadā || (13.30)</em></p>
		<p>It is a demand to see the manifold existence lodged in the unity of a single Being (<em>ekasthaṃ), </em>and to see them only as its dimensions or expansions (<em>vistāraṃ</em>). It is such a perception which makes one attain the Infinite. It is the demand for the intuitive experience of the Infinite that sets aside divisions and oppositions imposed on Being by the sectional or partial perspectives of logic and empiricism. The Lord values the gestalt (<em>samagraṃ</em>, as He calls it – 7.1) of Reality and wants us to catch the ‘thread which holds the beads’ (7.7) in any assessment of the working of even a section available to our ordinary experience. This gestalt or thread is the <em>puruṣottama </em>or the Infinite, and the Lord opens up for our observation its operative existence, as it were, in an instance called the ‘universe of life’ (<em>jīva-loka</em>), with all its incidentals or expansions, viz.<em> puruṣa</em>, <em>prakṛti</em> and their contingents.</p>
		<p>The total perspective naturally grasps the structure of the Infinite Being and treats the incidentals as only constitutive elements within a purposive theme. It is very significant the Lord calls <em>prakṛti</em> (the elemental insentient) and <em>puruṣa</em> (the sentient, which enlivens the <em>prakṛti</em>) ‘His two natures’ (7.45). These do not ‘belong’ to the Infinite, as ordinary possessions belong to a human being in an external relationship (<em>saṃyoga</em>). They are constitutive to the structure of Reality and have their being as functioning elements in the consolidation of the cosmic theme. Not being alien to the being of the Infinite, the Lord calls them ‘Mine’ (<em>me</em> – 7.4-5), and calls the things that emerge out of their interaction as nothing but His own ‘expansions’ without breaking the unity of Being at any stage (13.30). The tragedy of the classical Sāṃkhya was its losing sight of this unity of the Infinite Being and considering <em>puruṣa</em> and <em>prakṛti</em> as distinct and opposite entities. The <em>sāṃkhya</em> which the Lord teaches in the Gita is not the enumerative Sāṃkhya but is the knowledge of the Infinite with its inalienable dimensions; call them ‘<em>vibhūtis</em>’ or ‘<em>vistāras</em>’, it matters little.</p>
		<p>It is only as matters of detail that shades have been presented of these two, with their synonyms:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Puruṣa is akṣara, kṣara and kṣetrajña.</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Prakṛti is parā, aparā, and kṣetra.</em></p>
		<p>In both these what is transient and what lasts is shown. The <em>akṣara puruṣa</em> is non-transitory, and is the <em>jīva</em> or <em>prtyagātma</em> (the illuminating principle) within the sphere of life (<em>jīva-loka)</em>. The <em>kṣara puruṣa</em> is the tractable form of <em>puruṣa,</em> i.e. what we call the physical personality which a balance can weigh and a tailor can measure or a physician can treat. This is perishable, and what perishes is the <em>kṣara puruṣa</em>, what does not and keeps up continuity is the <em>akṣara puruṣa</em>. At physical death, it is the body (<em>kṣara puruṣa</em>) that is burnt, but the Self (<em>akṣara puruṣa</em>) is not subjected to burning or cutting. It is <em>adāhya</em> and <em>acchedya,</em> etc. (2.23-25).</p>
		<p>It is the same with <em>prakṛti</em>. With regard to the <em>parā </em>aspect, there are two meanings we can gather from the Gita. When it says <em>parā prakṛti</em> is <em>jīvabhūta </em>(7.5), it means the <em>puruṣa</em>, the life-giving principle. The other meaning is the subtle and unseen aspect of <em>prakṛti</em>, also called <em>avyakta</em>. The other names that occur of it are: <em>sanātana avyakta</em>, and <em>mahad brahma</em> (14.3-4), <em>akṣara brahma</em> (3.15). This <em>prakṛti</em> is the base which persists throughout as the infinite potential source of all manifestations of energy and action, into which all the created beings dissolve or ‘enter’ at the ‘arrival of night’, i.e. at cosmic dissolution (<em>praḷaya</em>) and ‘come out’ at the ‘dawn’ or creation (<em>sṛṣṭi</em>).</p>
		<p>The Lower or <em>aparā prakṛti</em> is that visible (<em>vyakta</em>) physico-chemical matter drawn from the elemental <em>bhūtas</em>: earth, water, fire, air and <em>ākāśa</em>. It is these and their combinations that give rise to the concrete world of our living.</p>
		<p>This is only giving a simple catalogue of the details of the facts of the Infinite Being in so far as it refers to the j<em>īva-loka</em>. But it should be borne in mind that the Lord is not concerned much with enumerating them as such. There is a grander theme which we are invited to discover underneath them and witness. The ‘show’ is not so much of these details as it is of the theme itself. But it is usual to miss this main theme and be caught up in the details that fluctuate, the ‘beads’ rather than the ‘thread’, which binds them together and gives them an existence and meaning beyond their narrow identities.</p>
		<p>What is pertinent is to know how they enter into a Cosmic theme and serve a purpose which transcends them, for they are not independent either in existence or purpose. It is usual to be lost in the labyrinth of set notions about the eternality of <em>prakṛti</em> and <em>puruṣa</em> and claim that their eternality implies categorical existence. When the Lord speaks of them as ‘eternal’ (and if we are not to forget the gestalt of His teaching) in the context of the sphere of life (<em>jīva-loka</em>) in which He mentions these elements, we find Him speaking of them in the sense that they are not His newly acquired characteristics. It is the Infinity that sets into motion the incidentals (and there can be a million of them), and one such incidental is the <em>jīva-loka</em>. To this are related the incidentals of <em>puruṣa</em> and <em>prakṛti</em>. They have relevance in the context of life, and in the absence of life they do not come into the picture. This is the meaning of their ‘eternality’, and they are not the ‘eternal two’ with the Eternity itself besides them, making the ‘eternal three’. For, an Infinity which sets against itself two other eternals cannot itself be Infinite.</p>
		<p>The exposition of the <em>kṣetra-kṣetrajña</em> or <em>prakṛti-puruṣa</em> by the Lord has relevance only in the context of the Infinite or to the theme of <em>Puruṣottama.</em> If we miss the emphasis laid by the Lord on <em>Puruṣottama</em> as the object of all endeavour, we will have missed the theme. Being incidental to the dynamics of the transcendental purpose, <em>puruṣa</em> and <em>prakṛti</em> are instrumental and make us feel the ‘pulse’ of the Infinite Being. To forget this is to forget the vital meaning of the Gita. The dictum the Lord proclaims to us is: “Know Me, the Highest, and you will have known the rest – <em>brahma</em>, <em>adhyātmā</em>, <em>karma,</em> etc.” (7.29-30).</p>
		<p>If one is not already awake to the situation presented by the Lord in the chapter of <em>Viśwarūpa Darśana Yoga,</em> wherein He virtually breaks the egoistically constructed boundaries of separate existence and dissolves all identities and individualities in an Infinite numinous, it is appropriate now to recover oneself and see that the field of the Infinite is not confined only to the human world. And it is better to submit to the understanding that the dialectics of the Infinite operate even outside human life. In other words, Infinity does not end <em>with</em> mankind or <em>in</em> mankind. When the Lord puts before Arjuna the analysis of <em>puruṣa</em> and <em>prakṛti</em>, He only takes from an infinite expanse of existence one that can be understood, viz. the sphere of life, to show how life and the elements that make it up are subject to His law of working. As a perfect scientist would take out a cell out of a body and place it for study under a microscope, so the Lord selects the field of life and holds a magnifying lens on this isolated area, as it were, and asks us to peep through it to discover for ourselves how the Infinite Being is operating therein as the eternal transcendent impulse. The analysis is confined not necessarily to the microscopic but applies to the macroscopic elements as well and other inanimate existence involved within the field. But we forget and assert that it is all about man! <em>Puruṣa</em> is not man that we know of, nor is he confined to the human individual as an individual, nor <em>prakṛti</em> is that which we see as our body or the world. When we are not able to understand the movements that are so gross in the world, how can we ever understand the subtle moves or forces that constitute even the small universe of life on the canvas of Infinity and link them up with the larger, wider and deeper cosmic truth symbolized by the Lord Himself in his <em>paraṃ bhāva</em>? Let us be rooted in this perspective before we try to understand the dynamics of <em>jīva loka</em>.</p>
		<p>It is essential, then, to follow up the Lord’s presentations of the Infinite as the ‘cosmic-acosmic’ truth transcending all logical calculations:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>It has no beginning (in the sense that we say something has a beginning). It is neither existence (that we know), nor non-existence (which we can comprehend). Its omnipresence is so single and indivisible that we encounter its faces, hands, eyes, ears, etc. (all over, so that we can never miss its immediate presence). It exhibits all functional qualities of sense organs, yet has no sense organs (that we can recognize). It is the cause of all (not in the way that something ordinarily is the cause of the other). It is interested in none (in the way we know). It is beyond the guṇas, but enjoys (without being bound). It is inside of everything, yet, outside, there is no place where it is not. It is in the moving, and equally so in the unmoving. It is subtle (in the sense that we cannot grasp it as we grasp a concrete one). It is indivisible, yet we see it existing in different things as if divided. It is the protector, yet is the destroyer of all things. It is luminous, yet beyond all lights. (It is in darkness) yet, it transcends all darkness (13.12-17).</em></p>
		<p>Is it transcendent in the sense that it is away from us? No. It is established in one’s own heart as the supreme unity of all knowledge, knowable and the known (13.17). To know that It is our being is <em>jñāna</em>, and nothing else is (13.12, 17).</p>
		<p>What is most puzzling about all this is that such an expansive Reality which defies all expectations of our grasping is located in one’s own heart! It is the truth of the Infinite that can be discovered in its entirety in any one point of existence! As <em>a</em> centre of Reality – and it is only the Infinity which can have centres all over itself – a man is linked up with the rest of existence.</p>
		<p>Against this wide sweep of the Infinite background are presented the pictures of <em>puruṣa</em> and <em>prakṛti</em>.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-023">24</a></sup>  The Lord says:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>With reference to the universe of life – jīva loka, the element which is at the core and sustaining life is a fragment of My eternal Self (15.7).</em></p>
		<p>We should remember here that the Lord selects a sample field of the Infinite Being to focus our attention on and to help us learn to what dynamics the subject is submitted. The Lord continues:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Being the centre within the field of activity (prakṛti or kṣetra), it operates by drawing all the senses, with the mind as the sixth (15.7).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>This is to be known as My higher nature, and associated with life (jīvabhūtam) (7.5).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>And there is a lower nature (aparā prakṛti), the dynamic or the non-spiritual, of eight elements (7.4-5).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>All living beings are to be traced to these (two Natures) (7.6).</em></p>
		<p>The Infinite Lord speaks:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Understand that all existents (or creatures) have their source in this. But I am the originator of all creation as well as of destruction.</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Besides My being there exists nothing whatsoever.</em></p>
		<p>The last of these statements is so significant that at one stroke it conveys the sense that “all this that has been said is Me only, as I am the Infinite,” or that “there is none superior to Me.” Both are true of the Infinite.</p>
		<p>A further analysis of the universe of life (<em>jīva loka</em>) is presented: “There are two <em>puruṣas</em> in this universe (<em>loke</em>): <em>kṣara</em> and <em>akṣara </em>(15.16).” </p>
		<p>What is this universe or sphere (<em>loka</em>)? Obviously, it is the sphere of life, and is as such indicated earlier in the same chapter (15.7). And it is relevant to remember that the Lord selects this sphere of life out of the Infinity, as that is the nearest to us for elaboration. And in the ‘womb’ of the Infinite there may be incalculable number of such spheres. In the <em>Vibhūti Yoga</em>, for example, the Lord says that he is the acme of manifestations in many spheres: the <em>Āditya loka</em>, <em>Vasu loka</em> and so on. It only implies the negligibility of human life in the scheme of Reality, without knowing which we think of ourselves to be of great consequence to Reality and its existence. It is Reality itself speaking to us (in the form of the Lord) as to how it estimates us as insignificant, and our estimates of Reality cannot be approximate unless we are identical with it:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>(In this universe of life) there are two persons (forms): the destructible and the indestructible. All beings that become are destructible (kṣara). The one firmly established in them (kūṭastha) is called the indestructible (15.16).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>He is the kṣetrajña who knows the kṣetra (13.1).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>… and is in prakṛti (15.7).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>… enjoys the guṇas born of prakṛti, and so in turn, born in good or bad wombs, as the case may be (13.21).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>The Lord (Īśwara) occupies a body, enjoys and leaves it (15.8-9).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>The ignorant do not see Him either while He stays or departs or enjoys the guṇas (15.10).</em></p>
		<p>And it is to be remembered here that the narrative about <em>Puruṣa</em> does not end with this.</p>
		<p>It is said that lying deep is the transcendent aspect of <em>puruṣa</em>. It pervades the three spheres – the two <em>puruṣas</em> and one <em>prakṛti</em> – and sustains them. That is the <em>Uttama Puruṣa</em> (15.18), the Transcendent Puruṣa (<em>puruṣaḥ paraḥ</em>) (13.22). This is not seeable in terms of either the living (<em>jīvabhūta</em>) or the non-living, i.e. in terms of either the <em>akṣara</em> or k<em>ṣara</em> <em>puruṣa</em>s, but transcends them, and so is called <em>anya</em>, the other, and <em>paramātman</em> (the Supreme Self) (15.17). Whereas the <em>jīvabhūta akṣara puruṣa</em> is subject to transformation, the <em>Uttama Puruṣa</em> is not. And, whereas the <em>kṣara puruṣa</em> is combustible matter and disintegrates at death, the <em>Uttama Puruṣa</em> is not, and therefore is spoken of as the ‘transcendent’ in the field (15.18).</p>
		<p>It is important not to miss the dialectics of the Infinite in this analysis. The Infinite though transcendent is not wholly absent in the field, nor is it wholly away from any point of its being. It is that which shines as the illuminating principle within the body (13.33). It is a point of concentration called <em>dehin</em> or <em>kṣetrī</em>. It is seen as living and making use of the senses and enjoying through them within the prismatic perspective of life. And thereby, the Infinite is not <em>away</em> from the epicenter or cut off from the main stream of the Infinite Spirit. An <em>aṃśa</em> is not a part in the ordinary sense, for it refers to the incommensurate Being, in the context of which a finite characteristic such as being a part cannot be applied. It is the incommensurable indivisible (<em>aprameyaṃ</em> and <em>avibhaktaṃ</em>). The epicenter has a ‘prismatic’ effect, i.e<em>.</em> it can throw off or project the picture of the three dynamic principles of individuality, or it can equally put forth a single-rayed perspective of the three. And so, the trans-logical description of the Infinite as <em>sarvendriya guṇābhāsaṃ </em>is also the <em>sarvendriya vivarjitaṃ</em>, etc. We shift the angle of the prism, it is now <em>sarvendriya guṇābhāsaṃ; </em>shift it the other way, it is <em>sarvendriya vivarjitaṃ</em>. At one angle it is the <em>jīva</em> and at another it is the <em>prakṛti</em>.</p>
		<p>The Lord makes this clear when he declares that the Infinite is the <em>Kṣetrajña </em>in all the fields (13.2), <em>upadṛṣṭa</em> (supervisor), <em>anumantā</em> (consentor), <em>bhartā</em> (supporter), <em>bhoktā</em> (enjoyer), and <em>maheśwara</em> (great lord) (13.22). Whether it is the <em>kṣara puruṣa</em> or anything that is destructible (<em>vinaśyatsu</em>) or the <em>akṣara </em>aspect of the <em>puruṣa</em> or anything that is indestructible (<em>avinaśyastu</em>), the Infinite is equally present, and its Infinity is not affected in any way, for it is not transformed into a different being (<em>avikārya</em>), nor tainted by projection (<em>alipta</em>) (13.31).</p>
		<p>Before we close this section, it is interesting to note that in any field of the Infinite Being, say, <em>jīva loka</em>, and select any centre therein, say, a microscopic cell, we have the basic consolidation taking place. Even in a small unit like this, there is the concourse of the aspect of Infinity, viz. the <em>Brahman</em>, the a<em>dhyātma</em>, the <em>adhibhūta</em>, the <em>adhidaiva</em> and <em>karma</em>, and in that unit we find the <em>adhiyajña</em> going on!</p>
		<p>Arjuna asks: How in this body does the basic <em>yajña</em>, i.e. self-regenerative sacrifice, take place? Who is there when it takes place (8.2)? The answer which the Lord gives applies universally to the micro- as well as the macro-cosmic bodies (<em>śarīra</em>). In any unit there is a combustion that takes place of the elements. That is the <em>kṣara </em>aspect of the body. It is ‘spent out’. There is a resident divinity who sets the spark, as it were, because that is the light or the fire within, and with that the movement is set. And what takes place is the sacred act of <em>yajña</em> or sacrifice. The sacrifice is Infinity itself (8.3-4). It is Reality splitting itself to be Reality. Being is sacrificed for being. What is burnt or combusted (<em>kṣara</em>) is not lost, but is assimilated in the whole Being beyond that unit where burning takes place. Taking a unit individually, burning away (<em>kṣaratva</em>) is necessary for the unit to survive; otherwise it ceases to be. A food that is not digested and the undigested that is not thrown out are not consistent with the survival of the individual. The Lord says, “I, by becoming the <em>Vaiśvānara</em>, cause food to be digested (15.14).” In a unit, it is not that something is <em>kṣara</em> and is to be discarded, but that it exists to be burnt just in the same way coal is taken for burning in a steam engine to give it a movement and so is associated with the unit. The heat which burns helps the assimilation or the upkeep of a body. What is called ‘death’ (<em>mṛtyu</em>) is this burning of the physical body, and is necessary and meaningful in the larger context of continuity; and whatever is meaningful for consolidation is the Lord Himself (10.34-39). What is burnt (<em>hutaḥ</em>) is He Himself, as also the basic Will (<em>kratu</em>) behind the act of sacrifice (<em>yajña</em>) (9.10). And all the elements are involved in this self-regenerative process which the Lord compares to a Wheel that eternally rotates (<em>evam pravartitam cakram</em>) (3.16).</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
