<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-014">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">14</span>The Individual – Cosmic Illumination And Energy Localised</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">T</span>here is a collateral issue connected with the dynamics of the Infinite, namely, the problem of the individual, the finite. What has been noted now is the functioning of the Infinite as a triadic ensemble of a state called ‘living’ or ‘life’ of a being – the <em>puruṣa-prakṛti-Puruṣottama</em> confluence. It is an instance of a packet or a unit of existence depicting how the Infinite is. Now, the problem is whether one can call this functional unit an ‘individual’ in the sense we ordinarily mean.</p>
		<p>The issue is not a variation from the cosmic theme of the Infinite existence and operation, but only concentrates on localised units (within the framework of time and space), and calls them ‘individuals’. To have a full grasp of the meaning of the term ‘individual’, and of a sense of fulfillment, a conspectus of the cosmic or infinite dynamics is necessary. We find the keynote of the truth in a significant statement of the Lord:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>janma karma ca me divyam evam yo vetti tattvataḥ</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>tyaktvā deham punarjanmanaiti māmeti so’rjuna.</em></p>
		<p>The Infinite exists as the Infinite and operates as the Infinite. And at whatever level it may exist and operate, its dynamics passes beyond measurements of the finite, and so is incommensurate<em> (aprameya</em>). Its incommensurate self-existence is called <em>ātma-yoga</em> (11.47), and its operation is termed <em>yoga-māyā </em>or <em>ātma-māyā </em>(7.25; 4.6), a secret by which the Infinite is seen to put up varieties of forms and movements – sentient and insentient, macro and micro-, sustain and propel them in a way that nothing escapes the law of Infinity or damage its being as the Infinite. In one of the most difficult, yet penetrating, statements the Lord makes, referring to it as His <em>paraṃ-bhāva </em>or ‘transcending dialectics’:</p>
		<p>The unmanifest has now become the manifest, so think the unwise of Me. They do not know the (secret of My) transcending state of the dialectics (<em>paraṃ-bhāva</em>) of the undiminishing and unsurpassing (<em>avyayaṃ</em> and <em>anuttama</em>) being (7.24).</p>
		<p>Shining from within my creative mystery (<em>yoga</em>-<em>māyā</em>) I (i.e. My existence and operation) am not visible to one and all. Me, the unborn (<em>aja</em>) and the undiminishing (<em>avyaya</em>), the unwise of the world do not know (7.25).</p>
		<p><em>Yoga-māyā</em> is the creative mystery by which the undiminishing is seen as diminishing, the unsurpassing as the surpassable, the unmanifest as the manifest and the unborn as the born. In this creative dialectics which is the mystery of the transcendent Being, none of these latter affect or cause a diminution of the supreme glory (<em>tejo-rāśi</em>) (11.17) that the Infinite is. And it is the very mystery which passes all comprehension, because it is by which <em>one is the other</em>: the undiminishing the diminishing, the unsurpassing the surpassable, etc. </p>
		<p>The implication seems to be that there is no transformation of the one into the other, nor a creation of something new. And the appearance here is no appearance; <em>it is a total being from first to last</em>. Perhaps, the meaning of <em>yoga-māyā</em> or creative mystery of a Being which is Infinite – infinite in potential and infinite in operation – will be sadly missed by us in describing its dialectics either as ‘creation’ (<em>sṛṣṭi</em>), or ‘transformation’ (<em>pariṇāma</em>) or ‘appearance’ (<em>vivarta)</em>. It is an unalterable Infinite whose transcending dialectics we are expected to intuit. While the unwise doubt it, those who see the truth – as the Lord says – blissfully experience the glory of the Infinite in its invisible and indivisible wholesomeness (9.4).<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-026">25</a></sup> </p>
		<p>The implications of this undiminishing and unsurpassed Infinity are to be seen in the fact that nothing is set up as a parallel theme against it to become a reality in itself. It is blasphemous to think of a manifest, born or finite existent being a reality or real in an infinite existence. It is as if cutting something out of being and calling what remains ‘Infinite’. The secret of universal consolidation of the Real is to be seen here. Nothing is finite in the scheme of the Infinite! Every instance of being, every movement of being is to be seen on the canvas of the unsurpassable, undiminishing Infinite. Time, space, individuality, name, form, number, etc<em>.</em> are all drawn into the all-assimilating Infinity, which speaks to us thus:</p>
		<p class="myquote">Never was there an occasion when I did not exist, nor you, nor these lords among men, also; never shall we cease to be in the future (2.12).</p>
		<p class="myquote">Besides My being there exists nothing whatsoever <sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-025">26</a></sup>  (7.7).</p>
		<p>But what puzzles us most is the concrete individual in our experience, who is obviously so finite both in being and potential. How does it happen, if it happens at all? However, from the point of view of the Infinite, the individual is just the unique, and stands for a level the ordinary tends to be. By a Law of Infinity – for, it is Infinity which is operating – the Infinite is everything (11.40); yet it is pointedly so in its bounty and grandeur in the unique (10.41). Think of a plant, an animal, a mountain, a star, a seer or a god. The unique in each of these “is verily Me,” the Lord says in the chapter of <em>Vibhūti-yoga</em> (or the <em>Dynamics of Self-projection</em>). How can a finite exist, if existence is Infinite?</p>
		<p>Perhaps, the perspective of the Gita is to be gathered in two ways to answer the incidence of what we may ordinarily call an ‘individual’.</p>
		<p> In one sense, there is no individual at all, if ‘individual’ means a separated entity, because all individuals are only unique points of the universal Spirit itself – ‘<em>ātma-vibhūtis</em>’, as the Gita puts it (10.47).</p>
		<p>In another sense, it is not the individual that matters, but the species that it represents. This truth is very often ignored or not noticed at all.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-024">27</a></sup> </p>
		<p>For in the scheme of universal consolidation, the individual is just a species consolidating a value. And these, the species and the value, are universal. We shall see of this soon.</p>
		<p>With regard to the individual and the finite, perhaps we are baffled and seek comfort in speculative philosophies, and square up difficulties of their incidence on the basis of empirical analogies, such as that the Infinite changes into the finite by a transformation; or that the finite is the creation of the Infinite from out of its own self or out of a different material. It is not unusual to find such theories within the range of Indian speculation. But a keen investigation of the text of the Gita reveals that none of these is asserted as the answer.</p>
		<p>With regard to creation, if it were to mean production of new things, we cannot say, on the premises of the Gita, we have our expected answer. All creatures are put out and absorbed by the law of periodicity or cycles, wherein birth is no beginning and death no end (8.16-19; 9.7-8). Not seeing the law of continuity and indivisibility, we see birth, origination and change, etc.</p>
		<p>The dynamics or the dialectics of the Infinite Being is that by a law of Infinity, it <em>is</em> the other, and does not <em>become</em> the other. The Lord would say:</p>
		<p class="myquote">If I am a Kapila of the Siddhas, I am as well Vāsudeva of the Vriṣṇis and Arjuna of the Pāṇḍavas, let alone the other beings animate and inanimate at the same time. </p>
		<p>He tells us: </p>
		<p class="myquote">How I take birth is divine, and how I operate is divine. Whoever knows this in truth (4.9) can know how the unborn and the undiminishing that I am can occasion Myself by a dynamics of self-measurement (ātma-māyā – 4-6), and how I do so on several occasions, when there is dislocation in the cosmic order, to relieve those who are well intentioned and good and to destroy those who are against it (4.7-8).</p>
		<p>It is no wonder that when the Lord spoke of His disclosing the truth to Vaivasvat, Arjuna was bewildered, for he was measuring from the human angle and not from the divine. Obviously he could not know the dimensions of the Infinite existence and its dynamics of operation running far beyond and far before the personalities we are told as having historical lives. Consideration of distance in time between personalities or differences of their individual existences are transcended here. The Infinite <em>is the other</em> at any place or time, but <em>is its own undiminishing Self</em> ever untouched by these relatives. Can we grasp this magic, as it were? Nonetheless, the Lord asks: “See My divine Yoga,” and He blasts the human mind of its preoccupation with the notions of the finite, of space, of time and of kind in the chapter of <em>Viswarūpa Darśana Yoga</em> (<em>Cosmic Depersonalisation</em>). Individualities that we call as such are marked punctuations only in the <em>vibhūtis</em> of the Lord, but not distincts of the Infinite. This is the incommensurate nature of the Infinite by which it rests indivisibly in the divided, as the One is the many, where the divided and the many are not distincts from the Infinite Reality. </p>
		<p>This is actually rendering a transformation of the history of an individual of his own <em>being</em>. The individual of our ordinary conception is metamorphosed into the cosmic with links and responsibilities which are cosmic. This is where the theme of cosmic consolidation is to be seen. The note that Lord Krishna strikes at the heart of every individual is this: whether we know it or not, we are elements of a huge or infinite mass of Reality gearing up at each point of its own cosmic being. In this theme of Being, it is not that the individual men X, Y, Z are, or animals are, but that the <em>species</em> is. It is not that groups of beings collectively (or individually) are, but that <em>life</em> is. In this scheme, it is not <em>who</em> that matters but <em>what</em>. For example, it is not <em>who</em> (such as X, Y, Z) builds up values that is important, but it is <em>value</em> (such as truth, goodness, uprightness, harmony, peace, and so on) that is important, and <em>what value</em> has been built up. And the crux of the demand is: <em>can anyone be that individual who builds up this value</em>? If so, that is being a <em>Yogī</em>, and one should aim to be that (<em>tasmāt yogī bhavārjuna</em> – 6.46), and he becomes a cognizable instance or <em>vibhūti</em> in the scheme of consolidation – a Kapila, a Vāsudeva, an Arjuna, etc. worth the name. Reality is another name for value and its existence is the consolidation of value (<em>dharma-saṃgraha</em> or <em>ātma-saṃgraha</em>). Should this be determined in terms of time or individual personalities? Or does it speak of a transcending existence consolidating itself?</p>
		<p>The metamorphosis of the individual into the cosmic places the individual in a position of greater responsibility both in being and in function. It makes him realize a relation far more universal than he ordinarily thinks of, and makes him shape and share a function beyond his immediate range. The highest sense of this realisation makes him throb with a feeling that it is not he that exists independently, but that he is continuous with a Reality which has no beginning or end, and that he is only a functioning occasion in the Infinite existence. It is only a sublimation or elevation of character that the Lord works up in the individual called Arjuna. Elevated in character, an individual feels that he is working in accordance with a law not of the moment and that one does not <em>start</em> a function anew. This is the sense of continuity of the self or personality, and one picks up a function or work which he has laid down on a previous occasion and perhaps far beyond the mortal conditions. This is infinitisation of an individual character and expansion of the meaning of the individual as a cosmic existent.</p>
		<p>How the Infinity involves itself at all levels of its being we have seen in the previous section, wherein we have drawn attention to how the Lord points to a situation called ‘life’ (<em>jīva-loka</em>). It is an individual instance of how the Infinite operates. At this level of the individual, the effective meaning of life is to be in tune with the Infinite, which the Lord calls <em>yoga</em>, and is shown as an expression of a cosmic dialectic effecting a consolidation of being and purpose. We are only to remember how it is not that there are three elements in the field – <em>puruṣa</em>, <em>prakṛti</em>, and <em>Puruṣottama</em> – in an eternal scheme of pluralism or dualism, but that Infinity has ways of preserving itself beyond distinctions. An intuition of this truth will make each concrete finite individual – we think that we are – a transcendental individual with dimensions of Infinity itself. We are asked to intuit that any distinct is not conceived independent of the Infinite being. From this point of view, one may call himself a ‘reagent’ (i.e. an agent with a consciousness of purpose) in the scheme of cosmic consolidation – for these distincts last only so long as the relevant universe of life lasts. This is the meaning of the Lord when He says that <em>prakṛti</em> and <em>puruṣa</em> are <em>anādi</em> or eternal (13.19). In relation to life and dynamics of being, <em>jīva</em> or <em>puruṣa</em> is the name for the localised centre of illumination, and <em>prakṛti</em> is the name for the localised field of manifest energy and action. In accordance with the consolidation of being, it is the instance of life that puts up the implements of <em>puruṣa</em> and <em>prakṛti</em>, and <em>beyond these two what matters is the cosmic theme of life</em>. The values that emerge, viz. truth, goodness, harmony, understanding, selflessness, peace, etc. form part of the consolidating theme on the canvas of Infinity. From the perspective of infinite Being, life itself is a <em>cosmic state</em> or <em>poise</em>, an aspect of <em>ātma-yoga</em>, and the Lord indicates it as an order of his <em>vibhūti</em>: “…of the existents, I am life” (10.22). The universe of life (<em>jīva-loka</em>) cannot be a purposeless accident, but is interested in serving as a crucible for a manifestation of values such as those which make Reality not an arid, dry and desert-like existence.</p>
		<p>It is in this connection that the teaching of the Gita gets a significance in placing a demand on each individual not only to act in such a way that in his life the cosmic forces achieve a balance and harmony (physical, psychological, moral, intellectual and spiritual), but also to become the instance of the species registering a raise in the quality of the stock called ‘life’ and the value thereof. This is the meaning of the Lord when he points to several instances of His <em>vibhūti</em>s as marking consolidation of being and value. Perhaps this is a pointer to evaluating what constitutes human evolution, i.e. to be judged in terms of this ‘rise’ registered in his accomplishments in <em>yoga</em>, which is nothing other than the universal or cosmic balance or harmony of/in Reality as opposed to discordance and imbalance.</p>
		<p>However, we should never for a moment forget that the <em>vibhūti</em>s or the unique occasions we are speaking of, and shown as consolidating in time, add nothing in the form of a new dimension or growth in the inherent structure of the Infinite being, but have implication of being just <em>revelations to our consciousness</em> as to how the Infinite exists as the Infinite and operates as the Infinite.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
