<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-015">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">15</span>Yoga-Māyā  And The Spectra of Bliss</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter"><strong>Y</strong></span><em>oga-māyā</em> or the mystery of Infinite Being operates in two ways: either it reveals itself or it does not. In the latter case we go by the mirage it casts and lose ourselves in the desert it spreads and lose all our discrimination (<em>māyayā apahṛta jñānaḥ – </em>7.15). It is this we encounter ordinarily, and of which the Lord speaks: <em>mama māyā duratyayā</em> (“My <em>māyā</em> is difficult to overcome” – 7.14) and by which we are overcome. This is what deludes us.</p>
		<p>But then there is the other aspect: <em>rūpamaiśwaraṃ</em>, the splendorous form or the state of the Infinite Being (also called <em>ātma-māyā </em>by the Lord) which when intuited we become joyous. And as the Lord says, those who intuit it blissfully enjoy: <em>tuṣyanti ca ramanti ca</em> (10.9). Such is the difference between the first and the second.</p>
		<p>With regard to the first, in a person who sees a mirage, there is, no doubt, happiness. But soon the person is disillusioned. Its enjoyment is an illusion. Whereas the one who sights real water is not only happy at the time, but his happiness is sustained. “The anchor which very well holds the boat without letting it go by the blowing wind and the surging waves is Me,” the Lord would say. </p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>It is they who are absorbed in Me, both in thought and breath, that eternally enjoy the bliss of being: maccittā madgata prāṇā…nityaṃ tuṣyanti ca ramantica (10.9).</em></p>
		<p>It is these men who have intuited the soul of the Infinite that are immersed in the bliss of it. They also ‘lose’ themselves, but in the sweep of the bliss of the Infinite Being. At each moment, and at each instance of existence, they face the Infinite. It is this bliss that greets them at each turn. This is the spiritual aesthesis, and one becomes a poet, a seer or a <em>yogi</em>, and responds to the glory of the truth that reveals itself and engulfs one’s being. It is the freedom of being, expressing itself as the beauty of being and experienced as the bliss of being. In it the <em>māyā</em>, the erstwhile hindrance (or cover) is measured out and its veil rended. No more does it distract us, no more does it land us in falsehood, bondage, suffering and mortality.</p>
		<p>But either one knows the dialectics of the Infinite Being (<em>ātma-yoga</em> or <em>yoga-māyā</em>) or one does not, as the Lord indicates on several occasions. Those who know the transcendental dialectics of the Infinite Being (<em>paraṃ-bhāva</em>) are safely on the other side of the deceiving complexes which fasten the unknowing to the realms of division and its logic. While he who understands the being and operations of the Infinite blissfully enjoys the glory of Being and its indivisible and undivided harmony, he who is caught up with the mundane is always ridden with the contradictions of divided existence. The implications of the statement, <em>janma karma ca me divyaṃ yo vetti tattvataḥ</em> (4.9), refer directly to the being of the Infinite and its inscrutable ways of operation in a self-consolidating or undiminishing scheme. But cut away from the basic continuity and eternality of the theme, we wander away from the truth and are perplexed as to how things can happen with such obvious limitations and oppositions. How can one ever understand the sincere yet naïve astonishment of Arjuna when he asks:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Your birth (i.e. manifestation) is obviously recent, whereas the origins of Vivasvat are unseen. If you say you have taught this to Vivasvat, how should I understand? (4.4)</em></p>
		<p>The entire teaching of the Lord is an answer to such naïve questions about the mystery of Infinite existence and how it operates beyond the visions and levels of human perception and understanding. It is comforting to us, the ordinary, to have it from the Lord:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Neither the gods nor the maharṣis know my origins (10.2).</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>The gods are eternally anxious to have the sight of My being (11.52).</em></p>
		<p>It is significant that the Lord asks Arjuna: “Are you interested in knowing Me as a ‘whole’ (<em>samagraṃ</em>)?” (7.1) And as if it is a boon to Arjuna, He projects the unifying vision of the <em>vibhūti</em>s and <em>Yoga</em> (<em>vibhūtiṃ ca yogaṃ ca</em>) (10.7). </p>
		<p>The key chapters, <em>Vibhūti Yoga</em> and the <em>Viśwarūpa Darśana Yoga</em>, slip through our ordinary understanding if we take them on a par with the episodes drawn from mythology, to satisfy the fancy of an untutored young mind. The Lord emphasizes the significance of the chapters as portraying the kernel of His ‘being and exension’ (<em>vibhūtiṃ ca yogaṃ ca</em>), and Arjuna confesses that he has been initiated into ‘the extremely secret and symbolic metaphysics of the Infinite Being’ (<em>paramaṃ guhyaṃ adhyātā saṃjñītaṃ</em>) (11.1), and desires to have a ‘factual’, i.e. a mystical vision (<em>dṛaṣṭumicchāmi</em> – 11.3). And the Lord graces him with that privilege of the ‘super-vision’ (<em>divya-cakṣuḥ</em> 11.8) besides giving him the firsthand experience of participating in the dynamics of Infinite Being, by effecting what may be called a ‘depersonalisation’. We will have missed much if the Lord’s statement, “One should <em>know</em>, <em>see</em> and authentically <em>participate</em> in the Infinite Being” (<em>jñātuṃ dṛaṣṭuṃ ca tattvena praveṣṭuṃ ca</em>… – 11.54), does not strike a note in us.</p>
		<p>Throughout the Gita the Lord makes us see how the human situation is only one element, and how hidden behind are forces that are subtle, recondite, yet always attuned to keeping Being as Being and not turn it into non-being. In the two chapters mentioned above, the soul of the consolidation of Reality makes itself felt so clearly for one who has this vision of the dialectics of Reality held to Arjuna.</p>
		<p>Obviously, the vision of the one who is relieved from the momentary impacts and bifurcated attentions revels in the glories of the very being which is ever in peace and balance. For him the obvious contradictions – the divine and the human, the living and the non-living, the moving and the static, the temporal and the eternal, the material and the spiritual, the luminous and the non-luminous, birth and death, love and hatred, etc. – are all occasions in the play of the Infinite, and are looked upon as component nuances of truth stretched beyond their mutual tensions and oppositions to form a magnificent tune. He not only sees through them, but sees beneath them to catch the hand of the contriver, the law of the Infinite Being, in the eternal theme of consolidation, like the ‘thread which holds the beads together’ (7.7). No wonder Arjuna, who had this privilege, had happy horripilations at the sight of the mysterious (<em>vismayāviṣṭaḥ hṛṣṭaromā dhananjayaḥ – </em>11.14) and declared: “My illusions are set at naught, my remembrance regained; <em>I come to be myself</em> burying my doubts.” (<em>naṣṭo mohaḥ smṛtirlabdhā … sthito’smi gatasaṃdehaḥ</em> – 18.73). The vision of the Infinite Being, of its dimensions and operations, is a salvaging agent, and it is significant to notice Arjuna saying: “I come to be myself,” and “I remember.” The real inner connection with the reality recovered, he feels that he is not new, but only as being eternally there, yet lost in the mirage of delusion and forgetfulness. This is consolidation of being – a metaphysical rejuvenation or restoration of personality and value, which had been lost in the confusions of ‘ontological amnesia’. </p>
		<p>For one who does not have this and the joy of ontological recovery, values are just empirical and emerge out of mutual oppositions. But for one who has this recovery of his links with eternity, conflict is only an occasion of growth or standing up gearing himself to the challenges of eternal Infinity appearing <em>now</em> as strength, courage, duty, truthfulness, kindness, peace, harmony, etc. While the unsalvaged, who is caught up in the mesh of empirical evaluations, sees these contingent values to be let gone as individual only, the one who has recovered himself sees them as accomplished elements in the infinite theme, beyond his life-limits and ego-achievements. He sees value in everything, beauty in everything, and the luster of the Infinite shining through the starry heavens and the pupils of the earth-born. He enjoys it as the overflow of grace, as the bliss of Being. A devotion intensified by the knowledge of the whole truth gets converted into an ecstasy of love, and one who knows is lost in admiration, enjoying the wondrous object of his love in each and every being. This is consummation which no ordinary living being can have.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
