<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-001">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">16</span>“Do You See As I See?”</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">T</span>he Lord’s incessant question throughout the Gita seems to be one like:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>“Do you see as I see?”</em></p>
		<p>Evidently, the demand is for a total transformation of the vision far beyond the individual human calculations of Reality. The implications of the Lord’s grant, “I will give you the divine vision or perspective (11.8),” seems to have had its effect on Arjuna when he declared:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>My delusions are set at naught, my remembrance regained and I come to be myself burying my doubts (18.73).</em></p>
		<p>Arjuna had the mystic vision of Reality, and nothing less than the divine vision could have worked this transformation in his thought and being. Perhaps an invitation is here for us to pass beyond the rational and empirical standards to mysticism or intimacy with Reality, which breaks open the individual from the defenses of psychosis and dividing intellect and delivers him into a boundless freedom and existence. Mysticism effaces the fortress of definitions of being, yet bestows meaning and value on things hitherto unrecognized, even as it bridges the chasms of the disconnected and the unconnectable. Mysticism is restoration of the contact (<em>saṃsparśa</em>) lost in the ordinary life with the boundless state of existence rendering one <em>to be himself</em>, overcoming, as it were, his ‘ontological amnesia’, as it happened in the case of Arjuna.</p>
		<p>There seems to be a grandeur or significance about the mystic vision of Arjuna, for he overcame his rationalizations about his immediate surroundings and personal considerations of losses and gains within the human situation he was in, and enters into a ‘trans-aesthetic’ condition of joy and admiration at the beauty of being his own infinite Self. Aesthetically, his feelings were a thousand degrees more intense than those of a poet or an artist, as they involved his whole personality, and made him, as it were, run back to the recesses of the unconscious forming the larger background of his contemporary existence, and go forward to the influx of consciousness of the yet-to-be. This was the experience of the boundless past and a boundless future making itself available in the vision of a divine moment. It was a point in his experience, but unlike any marked on a paper, for example. It was a ‘pinhole’ through which he peeped out of the customary time and space to a ‘beyond’ where time-space complex vanished. When he declared he had ‘regained his being’, he had passed through the ‘pinhole’ and got his vision ‘reversed’, as was evident in his confession. He is now blessed with a mystic vision which is a point-to-point converse, a converse which is not ‘distorted’ and which does not stop at the surface – as the normal vision stops at phenomena – but penetrates through and through, establishing a relationship with Reality most intimately. Arjuna had the first intimations of immortality and eternity. That is a direct knowledge, and we can make this out as the unique stuff of a mystic’s perspective: Where we see out, he sees in. Where we reflect and reason, he feels. Where we feel, he enjoys. These converses are mysterious to us, but mysticism is not mysterious. It is a perspective which a personality takes of the roots of Consciousness issuing forth as the world and life or the universe of thought and being, with interconnections well established. A perspective such as this is neither ‘mysterious’ nor ‘transcendent’ in the mistaken sense of obscurity and unrelatedness. It is, in a real sense, coming down to the brass tacks of Reality with the clearest of visions. Neither is it ‘supe-rnatural’ in the sense of going away from the natural. But it is ‘ultra-natural’, for its aim is to be conversant with all existence and, therefore, a bridging between the ‘infra-’ at one end and ‘ultra-’ at the other. The range of vision is multi-dimensional and takes an infinite sweep. With no impediments of a physical retina, it sees things <em>as they are</em>, bereft of their relativism. No wonder Arjuna was in a thousand raptures when he saw as the Lord saw.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
