<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-001">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">The Scheme Of The Translation And Its Perspective</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">T</span>his is a fresh attempt at presenting the text of the Gita. In offering this work, the approach to the text of the Gita will have to be stated. The size and extent of the text is not questioned, and what the tradition has accepted as a full-length dialogue of seven hundred verses is followed. But against the traditional practice of accepting the divisions of the text into chapters in order to grasp its philosophy, a <em>gestalt</em> is sought out over and above the schemes of the scholiasts and colophons. It appears to the present writer that considerable harm has been done to our understanding of the text by the chapter headings. </p>
		<p>Further, the classification of the chapters into ‘sixes’, as is sometimes done, does not help us in the correct appreciation of the philosophy. We see it clearly that the philosophy is expounded by the Lord as and when the topical problems were raised by Arjuna, and we should not forget the fact that at the time of the exposition the Lord was not bound by the designations the colophons have set on His themes. </p>
		<p>Naturally, when the Lord expounded His philosophy, there have been repetitions, disconnections, digressions, but <em>none out of the point</em>. Seen across the ‘chapters’ (the text is usually divided into) we have a remarkable consistency and precision. Krishna clearly indicates the various universes of discourse, defines terms that occur, points out their applications, critically examines prevalent views and rectifies confusions, all through driving at a philosophy which is comprehensive as it also illumines the topic He discusses.</p>
		<p>Instead of the usual order in which the text is presented, here is an attempt made to select and arrange the dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna under four major themes around which the discourse revolves.</p>
		<p>They are:</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>i. The Super-knowledge of Self-being,</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>ii. The Enlightened Attunement,</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>iii. The Dimensions or Dialectics of the Infinite Being, and</em></p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>iv. The Dynamics of Recoilless Action</em></p>
		<p>There is a view that the Gita is a jumble of many ideas, mostly repetitive and sometimes contradictory. However, once the arrangement is made on the lines attempted here, it would be seen that the text is consistent throughout; and where a repetition occurs, it will be seen to be purposive, that is, to emphasize the points made. It also becomes evident by this arrangement how clear the exposition of the thought is, how precise the definitions of the concepts are and how they fall into a pattern related to the rest of the thought structure. </p>
		<p>It is sometimes urged that the Gita is a difficult text. There is a point here. However, the difficulty in understanding the unity of thought in it may be entirely due to the way in which the dialogue is presented, usually interspersed <em>first</em> by the chapter-headings, and <em>second</em> by the intellectual digressions that come up. The present attempt tries to overcome these possible reasons which create the difficulties by avoiding both the usual chapter-headings and the digressions.</p>
		<p>Confusion is likely to occur by the obvious impressions the chapter-headings leave on the minds of the readers and by the loss of links that occur between the long dialogues. And so, the entire thought of the Gita is taken here as <em>one unit</em>, i.e. in one gestalt (as even suggested by Sri Krishna by the use of the significant term <em>samagraṃ</em> – 7.1). Accordingly, the whole theme is projected in four aspects, covering the whole range of the thought, as against the eighteen chapters we are accustomed to. </p>
		<p>The four aspects are highlighted here by suitable titles, focusing our attention on the consistently developed themes. The reduction, however, into four sections only of the thought of the Gita should not be taken as an attempt at discovering a minimal or ‘original’ Gita, as some scholars has done. The entire text is sacrosanct, and the selection as well as the rearrangement have the limited objective of just focusing the attention on the themes.</p>
		<p>With regard to the translation, it is submitted here that more than being prosaic and literal, it aims, while still keeping close to the text, to express the <em>inner meaning of the terms within the context of the themes</em>. The terms in the Gita such as <em>karma</em>, <em>dharma</em>, <em>yoga</em>, <em>vibhūti</em>, <em>māyā</em>, <em>ātma,</em> either singly or in combinations like <em>ātma</em>-<em>yoga</em>, <em>ātma</em>-<em>vibhūti</em>, <em>yoga</em>-<em>māyā</em> etc. are used to convey specific meanings relative to circumstances in which they occur, and in the spirit of the general philosophy of the text, as understood in the present attempt. <em>They do not convey identical meanings in all occurrences.</em> And so, an attempt is made here to feel the pulse of the thought, as it were, behind the use of the terms, and to convey the inner sense approximately. </p>
		<p>Keeping in view the general philosophy of the text, interconnections are shown by means of parenthetical words or phrases to complete the meanings. The Gita is its own commentary, and the parentheses are aimed only to unravel it. No extra commentary is necessary, as the text stands rendered here.</p>
		<p>In the text of the translation, the mutual addresses by Sri Krishna and Arjuna by their actual names, titles or alternatives are omitted.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
