<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-001">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">I. </span>The Super-knowledge of Self-being</h1>
		<p>2.10. Hṛṣīkeśa (i.e. Krishna) then, smiling, as it were, (at Arjuna’s condition) said to him who was despondent (and still) in the midst of two armies.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>Krishna:</p>
		<p>2.11. You grieve for them who should not be grieved for – and yet, you speak words of wisdom! The (really) wise (knowing the truth of life and death) grieve neither for the living nor for the dead.</p>
		<p>2.12. Never was there an occasion when I did not exist, nor you, nor these lords among men. Also, never shall we cease to be in the future.</p>
		<p>2.13. For the one who has the body is there childhood, youth and death. So, also, change of body. The one who knows (the dialectics of being) never is baffled (by the changing occasions).</p>
		<p>2.16. Of the <em>asat</em> (the non-existent) there is no occurrence. For the <em>sat</em> (the existent) non-occurrence is not. Verily, the seers of the ‘<em>that’ness</em> of things see the secret of both.</p>
		<p>2.17. Know, then, that by which all this is pervaded is indestructible. Of that which is undiminishing no destruction is made possible by any force.</p>
		<p>2.18. These bodies (growing, dying and changing) have their destruction. But the one who bears the body is eternal. Of which is said: indestructible, incommensurate. So (understanding this truth,) you may fight.</p>
		<p>2.20. This is neither born, nor does it die by any means. This (principle, so described,) has not occurred, nor is going to occur. It is unborn, eternal, unceasing and basic. (And so,) when the body is slain, it is not slain.</p>
		<p>2.21. The one who knows this to be indestructible, eternal, unborn, undiminishing, how can he (ever) think of affecting or killing it?</p>
		<p>2.24. Uncut, unburnt, unwet, undried (is this principle, spoken). It is eternal, indivisible, all-pervading, stable, unmoved, and ever is.</p>
		<p>2.25. Indeterminate, unthinkable, non-mutable, it is said to be. Knowing it as such, you ought not to grieve.</p>
		<p>2.29. If one sees this as the mysterious, another speaks of it as the mysterious, yet another hears of it as the mysterious. Still, having heard of it (this way) none understands it.</p>
		<p>2.30. The one who bears the body is not killed in any body. He is eternal. Therefore, no being which into comes to being is worthy of your concern.</p>
		<p>2.39. This – what has been said – is the Super-knowledge of self-being (i.e. <em>Sāṃkhya</em>).</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
