<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-001">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">II.</span>On The Enlightened Attunement</h1>
		<p>2.39. Now listen to what follows of the enlightened attunement (<em>buddhi</em> <em>yoga</em>). With that enlightenment you are redeemed from the bonds of contingencies (i.e. of contingent events and actions).</p>
		<p>2.40. Here, in this (scheme of attunement), a work when begun does not become futile, nor is there a jarring (even). A little of this bearing (i.e. the truth) saves us from the great terror (of destruction).</p>
		<p>2.41. The intelligence that is oriented this way is fixed in the One (<em>theoria</em>). But the non-oriented intelligence is verily divided in its attention.</p>
		<p>2.47. (In this scheme) you have freedom or authority for doing, but none whatsoever about the consequences (of what you may do). Let yourself not feel responsible for the result (of your action). But this should not make you think you can be (irresponsibly) indifferent (and so think of relinquishing responsibility for action).</p>
		<p>2.48. Established in this condition of attunement (<em>yoga</em>) perform action with detachment, treating equally success and failure. Equanimity is the <em>state</em> named (if it is done so).</p>
		<p>2.49. Mere (mechanical) work (however,) is inferior to work performed with enlightened attunement. Crave to surrender (at the altar of this) enlightenment. The small-minded are those who seek the result (only).</p>
		<p>2.50. The one of enlightened attunement abdicates both the moral merits and sin (in this scheme of dedication). Therefore, for serving the <em>state</em> (<em>i.e., yoga</em>, mentioned above, or <em>samatvam</em>) you strive. The <em>state</em> (as well) <em>is dexterity or art in action</em>.</p>
		<p>2.51. Verily, a person of enlightened attunement abandons the fruits of action, and so, is released from the bonds of birth, and attains a tensionless state.</p>
		<p>2.52. When the snares of delusion are overcome by your enlightenment, then you attain objectivity with regard to whatever you will have heard (about your seeking) and whatever you may hear (of them later).</p>
		<p>2.53. When your understanding gets stabilised (about this), overcoming the confusions of whatever you will have heard or will hear, you attain to the undisturbed <em>state of equanimity</em> (<em>yoga</em> <em>samādhi</em>).</p>
		<p>Arujna: </p>
		<p>2.54. What is the insignia of him whose understanding is steady (and similarly, what is the insignia) of his <em>state of equanimity</em>? How does he, whose understanding is set (on his truth), talk of things and conduct himself (in his life)?</p>
		<p>Krishna:</p>
		<p>2.55. He who has dismissed all desires of all things of the mind and finds consummation in the <em>Self</em> alone is said to be established in enlightenment.</p>
		<p>2.56. One who is not distressed in pain nor enjoys (being) in pleasure, and is free from fear and anger, is <em>stable-minded</em> and is known as one who is <em>silent</em>.</p>
		<p>2.57. He who has no (carnal) love for anything, who does not rejoice getting good (things), nor hate receiving bad (things), his understanding is well stabilised.</p>
		<p>2.61. He whose senses lie well controlled, and who sits firmly oriented towards Me has his understanding well stabilised.</p>
		<p>2.69. Whatever is night for all, for this self-controlled person, it is day. And when all other creatures keep awake (about things), the self-controlled sees darkness (therein).</p>
		<p>2.70. Ever getting filled by the inflowing waters, but unchanging and established in itself, the ocean remains. Even so, befall all fulfillments into the one who wins <em>peace</em>, but not into the one who craves all desires.</p>
		<p>2.71. Throwing all desires (to winds), the man (of steadfast understanding) moves about all existence, with no attachment or love or ego. It is he who wins the <em>state of peace</em>.</p>
		<p>2.72. This is the state of the <em>Infinite</em>: (<em>brāhmī-sthiti</em>). Winning this, one is never deluded (by anything). Established in it, he remains (when he lives here), and at the time of passing, he is absorbed into Infinity.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>5.7. One who is in the attuned state (<em>yoga</em>) is pure of soul, selfconquered, sense-conquered, the Self of all selves. And him, no work that he does taints.</p>
		<p>5.8. The one who lives in the truth (of the infinite dialectics) and is established in it, thinks he does not do anything – even though he sees, hears, touches, smells, eats, goes about, sleeps, breathes,</p>
		<p>5.9. talks, excretes, receives, blinks, etc. (as we all do). And these are the works he does (to live in the body), and he behaves as though the senses are (just) responding to sense-objects.</p>
		<p>5.10. Whoever thus offers up all actions to the Infinite and does them with no attachment is one who is not tainted, even like the lotus leaf in water.</p>
		<p>5.11. For overcoming the impurities of the ego of finiteness (in attitudes and behaviour), the attuned do function by their body, mind, intelligence and even the senses, but without any sort of attachment.</p>
		<p>5.13. The one who resides in the body of nine openings knowingly offers away all actions (in this way). Self- controlled, he sits enjoying, neither doing nor causing to do.</p>
		<p>5.14. (The dialectics of Self-existence is such that) the Lord (residing in the body) does not create the doer-ship, nor the deeds, nor even the cause-effect relationship. The Infinite moves by is own nature.</p>
		<p>5.15. (In this dialectics of Infinite Being) the Infinite (Self within the body of nine openings) receives not the sins of others, nor their good. (If one thinks not so,) it is ignorance enveloping knowledge, by which creatures are deluded.</p>
		<p>5.16. (As opposed to this,) if one’s wisdom destroys the ignorance (of doer-ship, deeds and accruing results, etc.), then such wisdom, like the brilliance of the Sun, reveals the transcendent reality.</p>
		<p>5.17. With that wisdom, whoever is attuned with devotion to the infinitude of the Self, he, cleansed by the wisdom, never gets back (into the chain of births).</p>
		<p>5.18. (Understanding the dialectics of the Infinite Being,) such a wise man looks at all existents with equanimity (and does not differentiate the value of beings from the point of view of their Self), be it a highly cultured Brahmin, a cow, an elephant, a dog or a meat-eater; </p>
		<p>5.19. moreover, has his mind fixed in such equanimity, and has conquered the chain of rebirths here itself. Verily the Infinite is equally pure in all existents, and therefore such men (who see thus) exist in the Infinite itself.</p>
		<p>5.20. At the occurrence of the delightful, they are not delighted, and (equally,) at the occurrence of the undesirable, they are not agitated. With stability of understanding (about the relativity of these contingents), they are not deluded. <em>The knowers of the Infinite exist in the Infinite.</em></p>
		<p>5.21. The one who moves about or established (thus) in the dialectics of Infinity is unattached to external feelings, and has his delight in/of the inner Self, and attains the undiminishing bliss (of Infinite Being).</p>
		<p>5.22. The wise one (who is established in Infinity, thus) never delights in things born of the contact of the external senses, which cause pain (and are relative), as they arise and disappear.</p>
		<p>5.23. Before casting off the body (which one is carrying), if one has the ability to bear the intensity arising out of desire and anger, he is a blessed man who is attuned to the dialectics of the Infinite.</p>
		<p>5.24. Whosoever finds delight internally in the inner Self finds comfort in it and illumination too. Such one is attuned, and at casting of the body, attains absorption in the Infinity.</p>
		<p>5.25. Those sages, whose dirt (i.e. sin) is washed and who have broken through dualities (and divisions of existence) and are self-controlled, revel in the delight of all existents and are lost in the rhythm of the Infinite.</p>
		<p>5.26. Those who know the dimensions of their own Self (to be infinite thus) are freed from desire and anger, and are mind-controlled, sense-controlled. They attain liberation here (in this empirical life).</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>6.15. The attuned is self-controlled, mind-controlled, and attains peace, the transcendental bliss, My state.</p>
		<p>6.27. The attuned, whose mind is still, gets the highest joy, passionless peace and attains the taintless infinitude.</p>
		<p>6.28. In this way, the attuned who is self-controlled and is free from all taints, with no difficulty attains the highest of bliss, viz. the living contact with Infinity (<em>brahma</em> <em>saṃsparśaṃ</em>).</p>
		<p>6.29. One who is attuned (with Infinity), whose nature of being is to look at things equally, sees the Self in all existents and all existents in the Self.</p>
		<p>6.30. Whoever envisions My Being everywhere, and everything having being in Me, him I do not lose, nor he ever loses Me.</p>
		<p>6.31. Whoever adores Me as existing in all existents in an unalienated state of being (<em>ekatvaṃ</em>), in whatever condition he may be, is the attuned (<em>yogi</em>) and lives in Me.</p>
		<p>6.32. Whether it is pleasure or pain, the one who sees the same everywhere, as like unto himself, is the highest attuned, according to Me. </p>
		<p>Arjuna:</p>
		<p>6.37. What happens to one, who, though losing control over the mind, yet has faith (in the enlightened attunement), but cannot attain to that perfection of attunement, as his concentration is not (yet) fixed in it?</p>
		<p>Who longs for the real (knowledge) of the ways of the Infinite Being, but is confused by the divergent ideas (that he might have heard about it), and, overcome by their fascination, is confounded?<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-027">28</a></sup> </p>
		<p>6.38. Is he not destroyed, fallen from both – <em>ubhayaṃ</em> – (<em>i.e.</em> faith in the enlightened attunement and knowledge of the real), like a torn and splintered cloud (destroyed by the winds), and, finding no stay anywhere, gets confused about the way of the Infinite?</p>
		<p>Krishna:</p>
		<p>6.40. Neither in this (world) nor in that is any destruction of him who has done something (in the direction of the good). Good is never met with ill-fate (or destruction).</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>Arjuna:</p>
		<p>12.1. Of your devotees, who are the better adepts in the attunement to your Being: those who by constant absorption worship Thee thus (i.e. in Your pleasing form, now taken by You – 11.51) or those who also (by constant absorption) worship the immutable (in all existents) and the invisible (awe-inspiring mysterious form of Your Infinite Being you made me see earlier – 11.17, 20)?</p>
		<p>Krishna:</p>
		<p>12.2. Those with emotion-filled mind but constant in devotion and intense in faith are more ecstatically absorbed (in Me.)</p>
		<p>12.3. Even those (others) who worship (Me in My impersonal universal form of Infinitude) the immutable, the undefinable and unmanifest condition, and (treat me as beyond all categories of thought but basically present (in all) constantly,</p>
		<p>12.4. by restraining and subordinating all senses (unlike, mind only, as in the previous case), treating everything in the order of existence with no alienated feeling, and rejoicing at the consolidation of every entity, realise Me only.</p>
		<p>12.5. (However,) their involvement is (obviously) more, as they are intending to catch the dialectics of the unseen. Having a physical body (with all its delimiting disadvantages) to keep track of the formless is really strenuous.</p>
		<p>12.6. Still, whosoever (as the above devotees) offer all their activities to Me, and by an unswerving application, meditate and worship Me, for them, soon I become the redeemer of their chain of death (and birth).</p>
		<p>12.13-14. Whosoever has no hatred towards any being, except that of friendliness and sympathy, with no selfishness or ego, and is balanced both in hardship and comfort, whosoever is always forgiving, content, controlled, firmly resolved, having an understanding (about the truth), and attuned always to Me, such a devotee of Mine is very dear to Me.</p>
		<p>12.15. By him the setup of the cosmic law is not disturbed (as he is always attuned to it.) He is freed from joy or sorrow. (He) is free from the fear of anything. Such a devotee is dear to Me.</p>
		<p>12.16. He wants nothing (for himself), is chaste, an adept (in doing things), yet unattached, with any sorrow of failure thrown off. He does not boast of any work as having been initiated by him (for it is already done by the cosmic law); such a devotee is dear to Me.</p>
		<p>12.17. He neither rejoices (over his success or glory) nor angered (at failure). He neither grieves nor desires. (He) is always unattached to the good and bad of things. Such a devoted soul is dear to Me.</p>
		<p>12.18,19. He is equal (in his reaction) both towards his friend and enemy, (for he has none of these). Even so, at times of his being praised or ridiculed he is calm, and (unaffected) when the wind blows cold or hot towards him. He has no preferences to make (in this relative life). He is equal to both blame and praise, and is silent, for he knows (the truth), and is satisfied with whatever comes by. He has no private home (to call his own), being unattached. He is firm in his resolve about his cosmic bearing) and is devoted (to the universal). Such a one is dear to Me.</p>
		<p>12.20. Whoever, without exception, with devotion to Me, the Highest, partakes of this immortal cosmic truth, as taught by Me, such a devotee is dearest to Me.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
