<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-001">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">III. </span>On The Dimensions And Dialectics Of The Infinite</h1>
		<p>Krishna:</p>
		<p>7.1. With a mind pining for Me, practising attunement, seeking refuge in Me, how you could know Me (i.e<em>.</em> My infinite dimensions and dialectics) as a whole (<em>samagraṃ</em>, i.e<em>.</em> as a gestalt), listen to Me (as I narrate).</p>
		<p>7.2. I shall teach you this wisdom, along with its analysis, in full. Knowing this there remains nothing more to be known.</p>
		<p>7.3. Of a thousand men, one strives (with concentration) for perfection (in understanding). Of these successful men, scarcely one knows the truth (of how I exist and operate).</p>
		<p>7.4. My nature (<em>prakṛti</em>) is eightfold: earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, egoism and intellect.</p>
		<p>7.5. This constitutes the inferior stratum (of My being). Know My higher stratum of nature, which is different and is the enlivening element, by which the whole cosmos is sustained.</p>
		<p>7.6. Understand that existents (or creatures) have their source in this. But (do not mistake), I am the originator of all creation, as well as of destruction.</p>
		<p>7.7. Besides my Being, there exists nothing whatsoever (in itself and by itself). By Me all this universe of beings (living and nonliving) are linked like the thread holding the beads (in a wreath).</p>
		<p>7.8. In water, I am the taste. In moon and sun, I am brilliance. Among the Vedic (formulae), I am the <em>praṇava</em> (i.e.<em> Om</em>). In space, I am the sound. In the male, I am virility.</p>
		<p>7.9. In the earth, I am the sweet smell, and (I am) radiance in the fire. In the living existents I am life. In <em>tapasvins</em>, I am their ardour.</p>
		<p>7.10. Know Me to be the eternal seed in all beings. (I am) intelligence of the intelligent, the glimmer in all that shines.</p>
		<p>7.11. Of the strong, I am strength. Free from all carnal desires and lust, I am love, which does not go against the real or right nature of creatures.</p>
		<p>7.12. Whatever that is soft (and nice), dynamic (and raging), dark (and obstructing), know them as rooted in Me. But (understand fully well), I am not (rooted) in them (as they are in Me.)</p>
		<p>7.13. This world of human beings is deluded by these <em>guṇas</em> (enchanting forces), and (consequently) does not recognise Me the transcendent (link and root of all beings) and the unaffected principle.</p>
		<p>7.14. Verily, this is the uniqueness of My divine potency (<em>daivī</em> <em>māyā</em>), and it is difficult to escape its power (and transgress its law). But whoever is attuned to My way of being, he alone can cross over the delusions (or snares) of these (distracting) forces.</p>
		<p>7.15. Their intelligence or wisdom stolen by (the aforesaid) divine potency, the evil doers, the idiotic and the worst of men working on evil designs, do not seek my (redeeming) shelter. </p>
		<p>7.24. The unmanifest has now become the manifest, so think the unwise of Me. They do not comprehend My transcending state (<em>paraṃ</em> <em>bhāva</em>) of My undiminishing and unsurpassable being.</p>
		<p>7.25. Shining from within My creative mystery (<em>yoga</em> <em>māyā</em>), I am not visible to one and all. Me, the unborn, the undiminishing, the unwise of the world do not comprehend.</p>
		<p>7.26. (Being eternally Myself,) I know the past, the present and the future of all existents. But none comprehends Me (who is eternal, and the ground and continuity of all these phases of being).</p>
		<p>7.27. Even as they are born, all the creatures are deluded by the dualities arising out of desire and hate (caused by the infatuations created by My <em>daivī</em> <em>māyā</em>).</p>
		<p>7.28. But those whose sins get diminished by their good deeds are freed from the infatuations of dualities and seek alignment with My being (i.e. My plan of things) with firm conviction.</p>
		<p>7.29. Striving to be delivered from disease and death, those who seek refuge in me (by attuning to Me) can know everything, viz. the Infinite, the Self and the dynamics of Being.</p>
		<p>7.30. (Besides,) whoever knows Me along with the basically elemental, basically divine and the basic sacrifice (or offering) are attuned in mind (and so,) comprehend (and consequently are absorbed into My being) when they depart from here.</p>
		<p>Arjuna:</p>
		<p>8.1. Which is the Infinite, the essential Spirit, and the basically elemental (to which you have now referred)? What is that which is basically divine here (spoken of by you?)</p>
		<p>8.2. What is that which forms the basic sacrifice? (Tell me, again,) how You are understood by the disciplined men, at the time of their departure.</p>
		<p>Krishna:</p>
		<p>8.3. (I shall tell you in order.) What exists beyond all mutations and destructions is the Infinite. Its essential nature is spiritual. The bringing in of all existents is the <em>dynamis</em>.</p>
		<p>8.4. What undergoes mutation and destruction is essentially the material (or elemental). The resident (in all existents) who experiences is the essential divinity. (And the truth of existence and its mode of operation is) the basic sacrifice, which is Me alone.</p>
		<p>8.5. Whoever, while departing from here, has the intuition of this dialectics of My Being, leaving his body, enters My Being – about which there is no doubt. </p>
		<p>8.18. At creation, all unmanifest things come to be manifested, and at destruction, they are re-sunk into the condition of the unmanifest.</p>
		<p>8.19. Beyond their own powers, these creatures are put forth and withdrawn, time in and out, at creation and destruction, respectively.</p>
		<p>8.20. But verily, there is yet another (principle, which is not subjected thus, and is) beyond the unmanifest (from where creatures emerge and into which they resolve), which is eternal and unmanifest (to the categories of knowledge and experience). It is that which remains when all the mutable and the destroyable pass away.</p>
		<p>8.21. That they say is the Transcendental Being (the <em>sat</em> or <em>ontos</em>) unmanifest to knowledge and is indestructible (as Being). Attaining this state, none relapses (to the deluded life). That is My state, which transcends all.</p>
		<p>8.22. Within which all existents find their locus, and by which all existents are pervaded, that transcendent is the resident, which is realisable only through unswerving devotion (or loving commitment).</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>9.1. (Now) this knowledge, with its practicability, I shall narrate to you. It is a great secret, knowing which you will get liberated (provided you put it into practice).</p>
		<p>9.2. This is the best (from the scientific point of view), as also, it is sacred (from the religious one). It is the royal science (or truth), and the royal secret (to be initiated into). It is realisable here and now as a religious truth and practicable with ease in one piece.</p>
		<p>9.3. Those men, who do not have faith in this (royal) truth, do not get Me, and so get back to the chain of deaths (and births).</p>
		<p>9.4. (The mystical teaching is this:) Mysteriously hidden, all this existence is pervaded by Me (the Infinite). All existents are based in Me, but not I (the incommensurate) in them.</p>
		<p>9.5. Look at my mysterious state of existence: the existents do not exist in Me (the way you think things <em>exist</em> <em>in</em>. The dialectics of My Self-existence is) that it bears all existents, conserves, yet is not borne by them.</p>
		<p>9.6. Like the great wind existing in space and moving about eternally, so the entire existence lies in Me (and moves about).</p>
		<p>9.7. All existents tend to My condition or state. At creation, I put them out, and at the end of the period, I withdraw them.</p>
		<p>9.8. In keeping with the law of My nature, I put them forth again and again, and all these in toto lend themselves to the dialectics of that law of nature, with no ingrained power to go against.</p>
		<p>9.9. The (cosmic) doings do not bind Me. But in all this dynamics, I sit untainted like an objective witness.</p>
		<p>9.10. Under My witnessing, the law of My being (i.e. nature) puts forth the moving and the unmoving; and so, the universe moves on.</p>
		<p>9.11. Those who are ignorant (of this secret law of My being and modus operandi) do not know Me who has taken up this human form. They do not understand My transcendent state (<em>paraṃ</em> <em>bhāva</em>). I am the Supreme Lord of all existence (but not a creature born).</p>
		<p>9.12. (The ignorant are) vain in their aspirations, vain in their efforts, vain in their knowledge (of reality) and vain too in their senses. Deluded, they stay in their fiendlike (designs) and evil nature.</p>
		<p>9.13. (But unlike them,) the noble-souled find their shelter in My <em>dynamis</em>. Knowing the secret of all existence in a jiff <em>(</em>i.e. in one piece, as I narrated,) they are devoted with no distraction (from the Truth).</p>
		<p>9.14. Ever glorifying Me, they are controlled and firm in their practice. With deep absorption, they participate in My <em>dynamis</em> (i.e. dialectics of being) and surrender to it (as their only resort.)</p>
		<p>9.15. Yet there are others (who with a religious devotion) offer all their knowledge to Me (the goal) and worship Me in manifold ways: sometimes as one, and sometimes as taking many forms.</p>
		<p>9.16. (But know the secret, the goal of all meditation and worship.) I am Myself the will behind all offerings. I am the sweet libation too. I am the herb and the sacred formula (<em>Om</em>), as well. I am the ghee (that you pour as oblation) and the fire (you pour into, as well). (And what’s more,) I am the burnt even.</p>
		<p>9.17. I am the father, the mother, the support and the grandsire of the entire cosmos. I am what is to be known as the sacred <em>Om</em> even. I am (the Vedas, that is) the <em>Ṛk</em>, the <em>Sāma</em> and the <em>Yajus</em>.</p>
		<p>9.18. The consummation, the protector, the Lord, the witness, the locus and the shelter. I am the friend, the source of all creation, and (the cause of all) destruction. (I am) the store house (from which all energy and meaning are drawn). (I am) the seed of all production, and in short, all (that you may see, and may not see).</p>
		<p>9.19. I am the heat (in the universe, which sustains it). I pour down and withdraw rains. I am immortality, as even I am death. I am also what is and what is not (in this universe of yours).</p>
		<p>9.29. In all existents, I am <em>fully</em> <em>found</em> (but not in a diminished way). For Me no one is an enemy, none a friend. Whoever worships Me with devotion is resting in My order of being, and I am with them. </p>
		<p>9.30. Even if he is of mean character (from the point of view of others), if devoted to Me, he is to be taken as the good-souled, as he is fixed in the right goal or <em>theoria</em>.</p>
		<p>9.31. They soon become noble-souled (by their choice dedication) and get everlasting peace. Know (it for certain) My devotee is never lost.</p>
		<p>9.32. Let them be sinfully born, be women, tradesmen, or of low caste – even they, by attuning to Me, get to the highest State of My Being.</p>
		<p>9.33. (If so,) is it necessary for Me to proclaim what would happen to the noble-bred, the devoted and the noble kings? You may get (the kingship of) this world, which, however, is transient and joyless. But you be devoted to Me (for overcoming all sins of acquisitions and conduct).</p>
		<p>9.34. Be My-minded, My-devotee, My-worshipper. Salute Me and surrender to the law of My self-existence. If (you do) so, you will attain Me.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>10.1. Listen, again, to my <em>ultra</em> <em>dictum</em> (<em>paramaṃ vacaṃ</em>). Wishing your welfare, I declare it to you, My beloved (friend).</p>
		<p>10.2. Neither deities nor seers know my roots, for I am the root of everyone – the deities and the seers.</p>
		<p>10.3. He who knows Me, the unborn, the uncaused, and the great Lord of the universe, is the clear-headed among the mortals, and is freed from all blemishes.</p>
		<p>10.4. Reason (or logic), wisdom, non-delusion, forgiveness, truthfulness, self-control, happiness, misery, coming into being and going out of being, fear and fearlessness,</p>
		<p>10.5. non-injury, equality, contentment, meditation, charity, fame, infamy, and whatever other dispositions and moods that may occur among the creatures you know, arise because of Me only (as the root).</p>
		<p>10.6. The seven great sages, the ancient four Manus, originated by My thought only. From them proceeded the entire world and the creatures.</p>
		<p>10.7. Whoever knows the secret of My self-projections and self-existence (<em>vibhūtiṃ</em> <em>ca yogaṃ</em> <em>ca</em>), is absorbed by the dialectics of My Being, if his attunement is unfaltering.</p>
		<p>10.8. I am the originator of all existents and by Me they move. Knowing this the wise worship Me with ecstacy.</p>
		<p>10.9. Always thinking of Me, living in tune with My Being, mutually enlightening each other (on My dynamics of being and operation) and always dilating upon My glory, they are delighted and (they) enjoy the bliss (of being and participation in it) (<em>tuṣyanti</em> <em>ca</em> <em>ramanti</em> <em>ca</em>).</p>
		<p>10.10. To them, who are incessantly attuned to this (mode of living), and who with love pray to Me (with a sense of dedication), I shall bestow (the most potent) enlightened way of identification (with My Being) by which they come to rest in Me.</p>
		<p>Arjuna:</p>
		<p>10.16. Please enlighten me fully about Your divine Self-projections (<em>vibhūtayaḥ</em>), pervaded (or covered) by which these universes exist.</p>
		<p>10.17. Oh, <em>Yogin</em>, how should I understand You, reflecting upon You? By what varied feelings should You be meditated on?</p>
		<p>10.18. Please repeat to me in detail Your state of self-existence and the state of self-projection (<em>yogam</em> <em>vibhūtim</em> <em>ca</em>). There cannot be any satiation in listening to your words of ambrosia (which immortalise anyone).</p>
		<p>Krishna:</p>
		<p>10.19. Let Me narrate to you My divine Self-projection (and Self-existence). But as there is no end to the ways of My Self-existence, I shall only tell you the most prominent or typical (of them).</p>
		<p>10.20. I am Self-established as the core (or foundation) of all existents. (Being Infinite existence,) I am the beginning, the middle and the culmination of all existents.</p>
		<p>10.21 I am Vishnu among the <em>ādityas</em>. The radiant Sun among the luminaries. I am Marīci of the maruts. I am the Moon among the (twinkling) stars (in the night).</p>
		<p>10.22. I am the <em>Sāma</em> <em>Veda</em> of the Vedas. Among the divinities, I am Vāsava. Among the sense organs, I am <em>manas</em>. I am life among the existents.</p>
		<p>10.23. Of the rudras, I am Śaṃkara. Of the yak<em>ṣ</em>as and r<em>ākṣ</em>asas, I am Kubera. Of the vasus, I am Fire, and among the peaks, I am Meru.</p>
		<p>10.24. Among the household priests, know Me as Bṛhaspati, the revered one. Of the generals, I am Skanda. Of the vast waters, I am the Ocean.</p>
		<p>10.25. Of the great sages, I am Bhṛgu. Of syllables I am that One Syllable (<em>Om</em>). Of the offerings (i.e<em>.</em> sacrifices) I am the silent repetition (of the <em>mantra</em>). Of the unmovable entities, I am (the very) Himalaya.</p>
		<p>10.26. Of all the trees, I am (the sacred) Aswattha. Of the divine sages, I am Nārada, and of the <em>gandharvas</em>, I am Citraratha. And of the <em>siddhas</em> I am Kapila.</p>
		<p>10.27. Know that among the (mighty) horses, I am Uccaiḥśravas. Of the elephants, I am Airāvata, the nector-born. And of men, I am (the royal) king.</p>
		<p>10.28. I am Vajra among the weapons, Kāmadhenu among the cows, and of the serpants I am Vāsuki.</p>
		<p>10.29. Of the <em>nagas</em>, I am Ananta. Of the water-deities, I am Varuṇa. I am Āryaman among ancestors. And of the subduers, I am (none but) Yama.</p>
		<p>10.30. Of the <em>daityas</em>, I am Prahlada. I am Time of the measures. I am the lion among the wild animals, and Vainateya among the birds.</p>
		<p>10.31. Of the purifiers, I am Pavana (Vāyu). Of the wielders of weapons, I am Rāma. I am Makara among fish, and of the streams, I am Jāhnavī.</p>
		<p>10.32. Of creation I am the beginning, the middle and the end. And of all knowledge, I am the knowledge of the Self. I am dialectics of the dialecticians.</p>
		<p>10.33. Among alphabets, I am A, and of compounds, the dual. I am the everlasting time and multifaceted supporter of beings.</p>
		<p>10.34. Of the destroyers, I am Death. Of the things that come up in future, I am (their very) commencement. Of the feminine terms, I am fame, prosperity, memory, intelligence, firmness and forgiveness.</p>
		<p>10.35. Of the hymns, I am the great Sāma, and of the metres I am Gāyatri. Of the months I am Mārgaśīrṣa. Of the seasons I am spring.</p>
		<p>10.36. Among the gamblers, I am fraud. I am brilliance of the brilliant. I am success, determination and goodness of the good (men).</p>
		<p>10.37. Of the v<em>ṛṣṇ</em>is, I am Vāsudeva. And among the p<em>āṇḍ</em>avas I am Dhanaṃjaya. Among the sages I am Vyāsa, and of the poets I am Uśanā.</p>
		<p>10.38. Among the controllers, I am scepter. In the seekers of success, I am moral law; and among the secrets I am silence. And of the knowers, I am knowledge.</p>
		<p>10.39. Whatever being there be, I am the seed. Leaving Me out, there cannot be any existent moving or unmoving (in the way you have heard Me declare).</p>
		<p>10.40. With regard to My divine forms and projections, there is no end whatever. Therefore, the instances that I have narrated now are only a few samples of My extensions of self-projections (<em>vibhūtervistaro</em> <em>mayā</em>).</p>
		<p>10.41. Whatever is glorious, good, beautiful and mighty (in a nutshell) you know (very clearly) issue forth from a fragment of My splendor.</p>
		<p>10.42. Of what use is the knowledge of all these details to you (if it does not become part of your experience)? Having enveloped this vast universe only with a fragment of My being, I remain what I am.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>Arjuna:</p>
		<p>11.1. To grace me, you have initiated me into an extremely secret and symbolic spiritual science (i.e. metaphysics). By what You have revealed, this delusion of mine (which bothered me till now) is destroyed.</p>
		<p>11.2. In great detail, I have heard from You the dialectics of the truth of creation and destruction of existents, and also of the secret of your unchanging Being.</p>
		<p>11.3. Even as You gave the word picture of Your Self-projections (description of <em>vibhūtis</em>), Great Lord, I desire to see (and participate in) the dynamics of your splendorous state, oh, Supreme Puru<em>ṣ</em>a!</p>
		<p>11.4. If you think I can stand the vision, oh, Lord, then, show me that indivisible dimension of your self-existence.</p>
		<p>Krishna:</p>
		<p>11.5-7. See My multiforms (I described to you) a hundredfold, varieties of divine forms, in various colours and dimensions. (Here) see the <em>ādityas</em>, <em>vasus</em>, <em>rudras</em>, <em>aświns</em>, also the <em>maruts</em>. See many more things you have not seen (or heard) hitherto, and which are all mysterious. See how the whole range of the cosmos, the moving and the unmoving, and whatever you want to see, embedded in one inalienable piece in my being.</p>
		<p>11.8. Verily, you are not capable of seeing Me with your ordinary eyes (as you have rightly realised). I shall give you divine eyes, so that you may see my splendorous state of existence.</p>
		<p>Saṃjaya:</p>
		<p>11.9. So saying, Hari, the great Lord of Yoga, revealed His Highest and Magnificent state (or dimension).</p>
		<p>11.13. Then, Arjuna saw in the unity of a single being (<em>ekastham</em>), the body of the divine of the divinities, the whole expanse of existence analysed in many forms</p>
		<p>11.14. by which (revelation or vision) Arjuna was mystified, and stood in horripilations, reverently saluting with folded hands, and bending his head down (in surrender) to the Divine Being.</p>
		<p>Arjuna:</p>
		<p>11.15. I recognise in thy divine body (in a piece) all the divinities: Lord Brahma seated on the lotus, the <em>riṣis</em>, the divine serpents; even so, all creatures of peculiar and strange forms (I could never imagine or fathom).</p>
		<p>11.16. I see Your infinite form of being everywhere (in each bit of existence) with infinite hands, stomachs, faces and eyes. I see no beginning no middle and no end to your cosmic dimension.</p>
		<p>11.17. I see You, Oh, God with crown, mace and discus filling all existence with your abundant glory and luminosity, shining from all sides, like the sun and the moon – a sight invisible of the incommensurate.</p>
		<p>11.18. (I see) You are the imperishable and the highest to be known. You are the ultimate stay of this universe. (I see you) unexpended (with all your expansions). The eternal preserver of the cosmic law, You are the most fundamental being, viz. the resident in all, as I am seeing.</p>
		<p>11.19. (I witness) the beginningless, middleless and endless infinite, potency. I see you with hands infinite, a face illumined and blazing, warming up this existence with the brightness of your own Self.</p>
		<p>11.20. By your single being, you are pervading all directions, linking up the skies with the worlds. The worlds are taken aback seeing Your mysterious terribly expansive dimension, endless as it is.</p>
		<p>11.38. You are the primal (or the basic divinity) and the most ancient <em>(</em>i.e. having nothing prior to You) principle residing in all things. You are the ultimate stay of the universe. You are the knower and also what is to be known, the goal of everything, the Infinite Being by whom all this existence is pervaded.</p>
		<p>11.39. You are Vāyu, Yama, Agni, Varuṇa, Śaśāñka, and Prajāpati, the Grandsire (of all existence). My salutations to you a thousand times, again and again.</p>
		<p>11.40. I salute you from the front and from the back. Let me salute you from all sides. You are everything. You are everywhere, pervading all. You are infinite potency and infinite power.</p>
		<p>11.41-42. Not knowing your greatness, and this (your Infinity), if I had called You the incommensurate, a friend, Krishna, Yādava (as if You are an ordinary being like me), either consciously or by mistake, either with affection or to ridicule, either while dining with you or at play or at rest, either when alone or in company, I crave your pardon.</p>
		<p>11.43. You are the father of all beings moving and unmoving. You are the most worshipful world teacher. You are the incommensurate power in all the three universes. There is none equal to you. If that is so, how can anyone be superior to you?</p>
		<p>Krishna:</p>
		<p>11.47. By My grace and self-design, this transcendent dimension of the luminous basic infinitude has been revealed to you, a form none except you has ever seen.</p>
		<p>11.52. What you have seen as My form is the (limit of the) impossible. Even the Gods are eternally crazy to have a glimpse of it.</p>
		<p>11.54. I am that Form (of the impossible). However, with an unswerving devotion, it is possible really to intuit (jñātum) (the dimension of My Infinity), envision (<em>draṣṭuṃ</em>) (its identity with all existence) and authentically participate (<em>praveṣṭuṃ</em>) (in its rhythm).</p>
		<p>11.55. Whoever submits to my infinite dynamics and attunes himself to it understands me as the <em>ultra</em> <em>dictum</em>, and whoever is never opposed to the consolidation of any (value or being of) existent, and has no attachment to particulars, attains Me.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>13.1. This is the body and it is called the field (<em>kṣetra</em>). Whoever knows this, him the knowers of the truth call ‘the knower of the field’ (<em>kṣetrajña</em>).</p>
		<p>13.2. In all the fields, know Me as the knower. Whatever knowledge there is of the dynamics of the field and the knower is in the line of My design.</p>
		<p>13.3. How to identify that field, what its form is, what its modifications are, what comes out of what and what that (designer) is, and what his power can be – all these, listen to in brief from Me.</p>
		<p>13.56. In brief, the field and its modifications are (the following): the great elements, the ego, the understanding, the unmanifest, the ten senses and the five sense-objects; the aggregate of the will, hate, pleasure, pain, mind, stability, etc. (Now listen to what constitutes knowledge in the context of <em>śarīra</em> or body, wherein lies the confluence of the field and the knower, so that an evaluation can be made for an attunement to My rhythm.)</p>
		<p>13.7. Humility, non-pretension, non-injury, forgiveness, uprightness, devotion to teacher, purity, steadfastness, self- control, indifference to the (lure of) sense-objects, having insight into birth and death, old age and illness, pain and even unattachment, not losing objectivity in the company of children and wife and at home, having a balance of mind always in circumstances both likeable and unlikeable, living in undisturbed places and enjoying the crowds, cultivating unfluctuating devotion (to the cosmic order and purpose), having faith in the eternal verity of the spirituality of existence, and contemplating to discover the dialectics (of the spiritual order) in every detail – all these are declared to be knowledge or wisdom.</p>
		<p>And things which are not these are non-wisdom.</p>
		<p>13.12. Now, what is to be known (as the truth) I shall declare, knowing which one attains immortality. (That truth is) the beginningless ultimate Infinity. It is said to be neither <em>sat</em> (existence) nor <em>asat</em> (non-existence, in the ordinary sense).</p>
		<p>13.13. It is all hands, all feet, all eyes, heads, ears that are found in the universe. It exists covering all things (i.e. exists being everything.)</p>
		<p>13.14. It shines with the qualities of everything, (but at the same time) it has no qualities of things. It supports everything, but in none it is confined in its interest. It enjoys the qualities, but is itself qualitiless. </p>
		<p>13.15. It exists both inside and outside of things (i.e. immanent and transcendent). It is unmoving yet dynamic. It is unknown, being the subtle (truth behind all knowing). It is far, yet near (being the very soul).</p>
		<p>13.19. Know <em>prakṛti</em> and <em>puruṣa</em> to be beginningless. Know the modifications (of <em>prakṛti</em>, the <em>vikāras</em>) as well as the <em>guṇas</em> to be born of nature (<em>prakṛti</em>).</p>
		<p>13.20. With regard to the incidents of cause and effect, it is said that <em>prakṛti</em> is responsible, and with regard to the enjoyment of pleasure and pain, it is said that the puru<em>ṣ</em>a is responsible.</p>
		<p>13.21. Verily the <em>puruṣa,</em> rooted in <em>prakṛti</em>, enjoys the <em>prakṛti</em>-born <em>guṇas</em>. A being associated with the enjoyment of the <em>guṇas</em> or qualities, he is made to take birth in good or bad wombs.</p>
		<p>13.22. The Supreme <em>Puruṣa</em>, the highest spiritual principle in the body is called the seer, the consenter, the sustainer and even the enjoyer.</p>
		<p>13.23. Whoever knows the <em>puruṣa</em>, the <em>prakṛti,</em> and the <em>guṇas</em> as well, in whatever condition (of empirical life) he may be, is not reborn.</p>
		<p>13.26. Whichever entity comes into being, whether moving or unmoving, arises because of the confluence of the <em>kṣetra</em> and <em>kṣetrajña</em> (or the field and the knower).</p>
		<p>13.27. Whoever understands the dialectics of the Great Lord existing <em>equally </em>(<em>samaṃ,</em> i.e. with no diminution) in each and every being (that arises of the above-said confluence), whether destructible or indestructible, has seen the truth.</p>
		<p>13.28. Whoever encounters the Lord in every being, at every time (<em>samaṃ</em> <em>paśyanti</em> <em>sarvatra</em> <em>samamavasthitaṃ</em> <em>īśvaraṃ</em>), never indeed destroys the Self by the Self. By this wisdom he attains the highest state of existence.</p>
		<p>13.29. He sees the operations of Reality as it is, who understands the Self as the non-doer, and the <em>prakṛti</em> as the cause of all movements, whatever they may be.</p>
		<p>13.30. When one envisions the varied existents (and their doings) rooted in the unity of one’s Being (<em>ekasthaṃ</em>) as also its expansions (<em>vistāraṃ</em>), he attains then the fullness of the Infinite Being (<em>brahma</em> <em>saṃpadyate</em>).</p>
		<p>13.31. The Supreme Self – whose dimensions he sees – is beginningless, undiminishing (with all the said expansions, for they are only revelations to consciousness of the ever-existing Infinity), and as such, even though residing (as the <em>puruṣa</em>) in the body, He neither acts nor is He tainted.</p>
		<p>13.32. As the all-pervading ā<em>kāśa</em> is not tainted, being itself subtle, so spreading over/about/in the body, the Self is not tainted.</p>
		<p>13.33. As a single Sun shines and illumines the whole of this universe, so the <em>kṣetrī</em> (one in the field), illumines the whole of the <em>kṣetra</em> (the field).</p>
		<p>13.34. Whoever sees the secret of the field and the Knower (of the field) by the eye of wisdom, and (also) the way of freedom from the elements of nature, goes to the highest limits of Being.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>14.1. I shall narrate to you, again, the peak (cream) of all wisdom, which being known, the sages attain their consummation.</p>
		<p>14.2. Adopting this wisdom, those have entered into My state, and so they do not emerge at creation (which goes on periodically) nor are troubled at destruction (for they have gone beyond these cosmic states).</p>
		<p>14.3. The great expanse of existence is my womb, and I fecundate it (at anytime and anywhere), and so from this all creatures come out.</p>
		<p>14.4. (On this terminology of ‘production’) whichever forms emerge from any womb, you know for all of them the Primal Nature is the Infinite expanse (<em>mahad-brahma</em>) and I the fecundator.</p>
		<p>14.5. From <em>prakṛti</em> (called <em>mahad</em>-<em>brahma</em> above) are born the <em>guṇas</em> or qualities: <em>sattva</em>, <em>rajas</em> and <em>tamas</em> (goodness, passion, and darkness). They bind (even) the indestructible ‘Dweller-in-the-body’ (to experiences and the consequent fruits).</p>
		<p>14.6. Of these, goodness, being itself pure and having no defect (or sin), gives out (only) illumination (and joy). (Still) it too binds (the Dweller) by making him feel pleasure in enlightenment.</p>
		<p>14.7. (On the other hand,) know that passion is desire-oriented, and springs from (carnal and worldly) thirst and attachment; and so it (naturally) binds the Dweller through actions (and to their fruits).</p>
		<p>14.8. Know that darkness is born of ignorance. It binds the Dweller in all the bodies in error, laziness and sleep (both literally and functionally).</p>
		<p>14.20. Transcending these three (<em>prakṛti</em>’s) qualities – which actually give rise to the bodies – the Dweller wins immortality, freedom from the chain of births and deaths, old age and pain.</p>
		<p>14.26. He who serves Me (and My purpose) by unswerving and attuned devotion, overcoming the (binding) qualities (incidental to the physical situation), becomes fit for the state called the Infinite.</p>
		<p>14.27. I am the foundation of all (ideals and goals of aspirants), viz. infinity, immortality, indestructibility, eternality and absolute bliss.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>15.1-2. They say the undecaying Fig Tree has its roots reaching up and its branches reaching down. Its foliage are the hymns. The branches spread all over – upward and downward – fostered (and tended) by the <em>guṇas</em> of <em>prakṛti</em> (the way indicated already). The buds are the sense-objects (which ripen into fruits and breaking up again into seeds, thus never breaking the continuity of the cosmic tree). The roots (as even they reach high to receive its sap, so too) come down in capillaries twining up the human species with the law of <em>karma</em> (i.e. the action-result series, both subtle and gross). He who knows the secret is the knower of the truth (of the cosmic play).</p>
		<p>15.3-4. However, the full dimension of it (i.e. the truth of the cosmic tree and the law of <em>karma</em>) cannot be available here (in the limited field) of the human region. For, it has not begun here, nor does it end here. Nor is its base traceable here (so that it could be snapped, as one may wish). This mighty and sturdy rooted Fig Tree (of <em>saṃsāra</em>) will have to be destroyed (for winning immortality) by the unbending weapon of non-attachment. And that state beyond (the region of the Fig Tree) is to be sought. Reaching that there is no returning (to bondage). That state is the Transcendent Person from whom originate the dynamics of immortal life (of the Fig and the human species).</p>
		<p>15.5. With no delusion of pride, with the vice of attachment conquered, freed from desire (but not of) the realisation of the eternal Self, freed from dualities, from attachment to the pain-pleasure complex, the wise (i.e. the knowers of the truth mentioned above) reach that indestructible state.</p>
		<p>15.6. There neither the Sun nor the Moon nor the Fire shines. (For all these luminaries grow in the brilliance of the Self). Reaching there, the wise do not return (to bondage). That is my highest state. </p>
		<p>15.7-8. In the world of living beings, an aspect of mine is concentered, enlivening nature and drawing around itself the six senses, including the mind. While the Lord (i.e. His aspect) gets a body, and while crossing it, gets hold of these (senses) and marches with them as the wind takes away the smell from their natural spots.</p>
		<p>15.9. (The Lord) enjoys the objects of sense (i.e. the buds of the Fig Tree) by residing in the ear, eye, skin, tongue, nose and also in the mind.</p>
		<p>15.10. When He gets out, or when He resides in, or even when he is enjoying, the ignorant one, clouded by (the limiting) <em>guṇas</em> of <em>prakṛti,</em> does not see.</p>
		<p>15.11. The Yogins trained in the dialectics of the Self, see Him (i.e. the Lord) at all stages of His movement (in the body). But even with the training, the unwise and the unoriented do not identify Him at all.</p>
		<p>15.12. Know that the luminosity in the Sun illumining the whole of cosmos, and that in the Moon and the Fire, is all Mine.</p>
		<p>15.13. Pervading all existents, I support them with My vitality. Becoming the saving juice (the nectar), the sap of their very life, I foster all herbs.</p>
		<p>15:34. Becoming the digestive fire (<em>vaisvānara</em>) seated in the bodies of living beings, associated with life-breaths, I cause the digestion in four ways.</p>
		<p>15.15. In the hearts of all beings, I am established. Memory, knowledge, (even) skepticism, etc. arise on account of Me. The object of all knowledge, which the Vedas proclaim, is Me alone. Know for certain that I am responsible for the very Vedas, and (if there could be anyone knowing them,) I am the knower of the Vedas.</p>
		<p>15.16. (In this universe of life) there are two persons (forms), the destructible and the indestructible. All beings that become (from the little worm to the vast mountain) are the destructible (<em>kṣara</em>). Only the firmly established in them is called the indestructible resident (<em>kūṭastha</em>).</p>
		<p>15.17. Even as the aspect of the resident is hidden in the hearts of beings, there is the other transcendent ground of the cosmic person. It is said to be the Super Soul or Self.</p>
		<p>15.18. For this reason of its transcending the destructible and the indestructible aspects of the Resident, the Super Self is proclaimed both in common usage and in the Veda as <em>Puruṣottama</em> (the Transcendent Being).</p>
		<p>15.19. With no delusions (about My dimensions as the transcending and immanent Self), whoever knows Me as the <em>absolute</em> (Real), indeed, knows everything that is to be known. And he does adore Me with all absorption (for he is attuned to My Being).</p>
		<p>15.20. Thus <em>the most secret of the sciences</em> (or the dialectics of the Absolute Being – how It is and how It operates) is narrated to you. Knowing this, a person becomes illumined (and so, freed from ignorance and bondage,) finds his consummation.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
