<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-021">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">IV. </span>On The Dynamics Of Recoilless Action</h1>
		<p>Krishna:</p>
		<p>3.3. Two courses of devoted participation (in the dynamics of the) universe have been enunciated by Me earlier: <em>participation through enlightenment</em>, as in Sāṃkhya, and <em>participation through practical attunement</em>, as in Yoga.</p>
		<p>3.4. A person does not win freedom from action by keeping away from it. Nor does he win perfection by abandoning all (including action).</p>
		<p>3.5. None whosoever can remain idle (if by ‘idle’ he means abandoning all action) even for a second, because everyone is overpowered by the <em>guṇas</em> or forces of Nature, and is made to engage himself in action.</p>
		<p>3.9. Except for such activity oriented towards (selfless) sacrifice (intended to serve all or the cosmic purpose), all other acts involve men in bondage. That is the meaning of <em>karma </em>(or action). Disregarding all (other implications of it), engage yourself properly.</p>
		<p>3.10. (The Lord, in the form of) Prajāpati created creatures and (prescribed) sacrifice (<em>yajña</em>, in the above sense of selfless participation in the cosmic design) simultaneously at the beginning (of creation) and said: “By this shall thou produce (i.e. continue). Let sacrifice be your source of fulfillment.”</p>
		<p>3.11. By sacrifice satisfy the divinities (that matter) and they shall fulfill what you require. By mutual fulfillment, attain the highest (purpose and existence).</p>
		<p>3.12. Satisfied or fulfilled by your sacrifice, the divinities grace you with what you need. What one receives from them, if he does not offer back, he (wrongfully) enjoys fruits (given by them) like a thief.</p>
		<p>3.13. By receiving what remains of the sacrifice, the good-souled are freed (from all taints). But the evil-minded, who digest in greed (what is not earned rightfully), get back only sin (as the reward of not offering back).</p>
		<p>3.14-16. The creatures are shaped and nurtured by the food and matter; and these by (the heavenly downpour of) rains; and these by the (collocation of elements in their act of) sacrifice, which, again, waits for fructification (<em>karma</em>), which is linked with the wider (dynamics of the) cosmos (<em>brahma</em>); and this, on the unalterability of the cosmic law (<em>akṣara</em>); and this, eternally engaged in self-sacrifice or regeneration, <em>i.e.</em> <em>yajña.</em> And so, rotates the cosmic wheel. In this context (of cosmic dynamics), whoever does not submit to the law of the wheel, becomes sinful. Such (non-submitting) sneaky men lead a wasteful (and wasted) life.</p>
		<p>3.17. Whoever finds his object of fulfillment in his Self, his consummation in the Self only, and satisfaction too, has nothing else to wish for or to do.</p>
		<p>3.18. Neither for any action done by him, nor for any non-action of his, is (attached) any significance at this level (of highest orientation and being), and no contingent existent can keep him satisfied (and so, bound).</p>
		<p>3.19. Therefore, always engage in action, performing it with no desires attached. Whichever person sees his work (considering it to be the sacred sacrifice) with detachment attains the highest state of consummation.</p>
		<p>3.20. By working (in this sense of sacrifice) Janaka and the like attained the highest perfection. You ought to, yourself, from the perspective of serving cosmic consolidation (<em>loka-saṃgraha</em>).</p>
		<p>3.21. An ordinary (and unthinking) man does (things simply imitating) what the best of men will do. That is, whatever he, i.e. the best of men, will do with an authentic authority (of his understanding and perspective), (ordinary) people will do it by following him faithfully.</p>
		<p>3.22. (Believe it.) I have no work (or function, as you have) to do whatever in the three universes (of the animal, human or divine), for I have nothing that I do not possess, or yet, seek to possess. Still I exist functioning (in the sense of cosmic sacrifice).</p>
		<p>3.23. If ever I do not engage thus in (what happens to be) action with care, men follow Me too (thinking I am not doing things) in being inactive.</p>
		<p>3.24. <em>If I do not function, the worlds will collapse, and I will be responsible for all the dislocation of cosmic functions, and I will have destroyed all creation.</em></p>
		<p>3.25. If the unknowing engage themselves in action with attachment, you, the knowing, should engage with attunement to serving cosmic consolidation with no attachment (i.e. in the spirit of sacrifice.)</p>
		<p>3.26. However, do not create confusion in the minds of those who engage themselves in action with no understanding (of the implications of action or non-action in the cosmic scheme). Make them only love their work (and renounce the fruits thereof, which is what is needed). Knowing (the cosmic design, as you do,) involve yourself (in cosmic oriented action) with deep devotion.</p>
		<p>3.27. In such people who do not know the secret of cosmic sacrifice, what keeps them working, at least, is the cosmic power of Nature. They are better, at least, who work unknowingly, than those befooled egotists who think <em>they</em> do all the work.</p>
		<p>3.28. But the one who knows (the dialectics of Nature, which forces every being to act,) is sure that, by the inherent qualities and dynamism of Nature (<em>guṇa</em> and <em>karma</em>), qualities play on qualities (and so, they are themselves not involved in the natural dynamics). Knowing the objective dynamics of Nature (thus) and how it acts, one is not involved (with the fruits that come about).</p>
		<p>3.29. One (however) deluded by the qualities of Nature (thinking that <em>he</em> did all action) involves himself in the effects of them. Enlightened (now) that you are fully of the dialectics of Nature, do not bewilder these half-knowing idiots (from performing at least their routine work they are engaged in).</p>
		<p>3.30. Through understanding the spiritual truth, with no desire (for fruits), nor with egoism in what you do, offer to Me all you do, and be freed from the fever (of delusions you have) and fight (the battle that is facing you).</p>
		<p>3.31. Human beings, whoever they may be (without distinction), having faith (in Me) and having no greed (or egoism), always put my teaching into action and get absolved from the bonds of work.</p>
		<p>3.33. It is immaterial if one is a knower or not. He also works according to the objective dialectics of his own nature. All existents follow Nature’s law. What can control do?</p>
		<p>3.34. Love and hate are lodged well in the sense-organs and also in the sense-objects. Let none be caught by them, for they are the enemies in the way (of one’s freedom).</p>
		<p>3.35. Even if lacking merit, if one applies to one’s own natural functions, it is better than adopting functions alien to one’s nature and performing them perfectly. It is good if one were to die in the course of performing one’s own natural functions. For, functions alien to one’s nature are dangerous (to oneself, as they are not in accordance with the cosmic design).</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>4.1. This dialectics of application to duty, as a truth-constant, I declared to Vivaswat (of yore), who conveyed it to Manu, and in turn, Manu conveyed it to Ikṣvāku.</p>
		<p>4.2. Thus, continued through tradition, this truth, the sages among kings know. But the knowledge of dialectics got blunted in the passage of time (and by lapses of people).</p>
		<p>4.3. But the same knowledge of the ancient law is being restored to you, as that (knowledge) happens to be the best of secrets (for one’s redemption), and as you happen to be My devoted friend.</p>
		<p>Arjuna:</p>
		<p>4.4. Your birth (i.e. manifestation) is obviously recent, whereas the origins of Vivaswat are untraceable (in antiquity). If you say, you have taught this to Vivaswat, how should I understand (the mystery of the disparity in time)?</p>
		<p>Krishna:</p>
		<p>4.5. I have had many <em>manifestations</em>, as you too had your <em>births</em>. But I know them fully (as I am the originator of all beings, being eternity Myself), and you do not (due to the obscuring power of My <em>Māyā</em>).</p>
		<p>4.6. Though I am unborn and unchanging (even through the varied manifestations), and though I am the Lord of all existents (not a creature like you), standing on My Nature, I manifest (as and when I like) by the dynamics of self-existence (<em>ātma</em>-<em>māyā</em>).</p>
		<p>4.7. As and when the cosmic order is slackened, and disorder gets stronger, then by the very dynamics of My self-existence (<em>ātmānāṃ</em>) I manifest Myself. (I am not born, as you may think of Me.)</p>
		<p>4.8. To save (or salvage) the good and to destroy the evil-doers, i.e. to consolidate the cosmic order (<em>dharma</em> <em>saṃsthāpana</em> <em>arthāya</em>) I manifest from time to time (in a way and fashion that cannot be comprehended ordinarily).</p>
		<p>4.9. My manifestations and modus operandi (<em>janma</em> <em>ca</em> <em>karma</em> <em>ca</em>) are divine (<em>divyaṃ</em>, not human). Whoever knows this in truth (which is the secret of My dynamics of being and expression), casting off his body, never takes it again, but attains to My state (of universal Being). </p>
		<p>4.13. Based on qualities and functions natural to beings, the four-fold classification has been designed by Me (in the scheme of cosmic consolidation). For that (cosmic planning and designing) consider Me as the executor. Still, you (should discriminate and) know I am the unchanging principle of the causal agency.</p>
		<p>4.14. (Do not consider Me as an ordinary doer of things like a man), for I do not have any desires for fruits of actions, and so, actions, i.e<em>.</em> cosmic doings, do not taint Me. He who understands (Me and acts in the same spirit of cosmic sacrifice) is not bound by actions (in the world).</p>
		<p>4.15. (This is the way of liberation). Thus knowing (the dialectics of recoilless action) the lovers of liberation did act in days of yore. Therefore engage yourself in the objective dynamics (of nature) in the same way (and get liberated).</p>
		<p>4.18. Whoever discovers the truth which makes it a recoilless action, and in the recoilless action a duty, he, among his species, is the wise. (By dint of catching the pulse of the cosmic dynamics) he is absorbed in the universal <em>dynamis</em>).</p>
		<p>4.19. One whose every move is bereft of self-desire, and whose every action is burnt by the fire of wisdom, him, the knowers (of the secret) identify as the wise.</p>
		<p>4.20. Such a (wise) man detaches himself from the fruits of action. Eternally contented (in doing well what he does), and independent (of all other considerations), though engaged deeply in duties, he is not doing anything really (that binds him).</p>
		<p>4.21. He is a being (<em>ātman</em>) with no ambitions (as they are burnt away in him). With mind well controlled, he receives nothing and works for the simple maintenance of the physical organism, and so does not get defiled (even though he is seen to live from ordinary standards).</p>
		<p>4.22. He is satisfied with whatever he finds (for his living), transcends dualities (of empirical existence) and has no avarice. Always established in equanimity, he sees success and failure (as of no importance). And so, ever engaged in action (which, for him is cosmic action and not individual or personal), he (in My own manner) is never bound. </p>
		<p>4.23. He whose mind is established in this wisdom is free (in life, and lives beyond the dichotomising effects of his normal action). Having no attachment to the fruits of action, he performs all functions (as duties) in the spirit of sacrifice. He has all the bonds of <em>karma</em> destroyed.</p>
		<p>(The entire way and the spirit of his living can be analysed thus:)</p>
		<p>4.24. The sacrifice (of the above description) is the act of the Infinite. What is sacrificed is the Infinite. What burns (as the offering) is the Infinite. What is burnt (too) is the Infinite. And what is aimed at by absorption in this infinite <em>dynamis</em> is the Infinite only. </p>
		<p>4.31. Whoever partakes of what remains of this sacrifice (<em>yajña</em>) reaches Infinity or eternity. Whoever does not offer himself in sacrifice (like this) has no place in this existence; why think of a future for him hereafter?</p>
		<p>4.35. Once you know (the picture of the Infinite being, and consolidation through sacrifice, which is the name for the cosmic operation), you never can have any doubt (about the meaning of life and its functions in the universe). By that wisdom you will see the infinite existence in you. If you do, how can you miss it in Me, the Cosmic Person?</p>
		<p>4.41. One who is attuned to detachment or the way of performing actions (in the sense of sacrifice) has broken off all doubts through his wisdom. He is <em>ātma</em> <em>rata</em>, i.e. who enjoys the being of his Self. Him no necessity of action binds.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>18.2. (According to those who know the meaning of selfless or recoilless action in the spirit of sacrifice,) renunciation (<em>saṃnyāsa</em>) is to drop out from all desire-oriented activities. Surrender (<em>tyāga</em>) is surrendering all fruits of action. So say the discriminating men.</p>
		<p>18.3. However, there are thinkers who say that all actions (without any exception) should be dropped as evil. But others there are (who have an understanding of the dynamics of Being, as outlined above,) who say that sacrifice, gifting and doing penance are not to be abandoned.</p>
		<p>18.4. With regard to surrender (and renunciation) listen to My definite position. As acclaimed by Me surrender is three-fold.</p>
		<p>18.5. There is no abandoning of sacrifice, making gifts, and doing penance. These should be performed always. What purifies (and sublimates) one who merely reasons are verily (these:) sacrifice, gifts and penance.</p>
		<p>18.6. However these functions must be done by surrendering the associated fruits. They are thus to be taken up as duties (obligatory). This is my wise counsel.</p>
		<p>18.7. Abandoning of the obligatory duties cannot make it renunciation (<em>saṃnyāsa</em>). However, if one were to abandon them with a false understanding of renunciation, it is nothing but ignorance (<em>tamas</em>).</p>
		<p>18.8. If one were not to undertake action for fear of physical strain (or exhaustion or injury), it is not only passionate (<em>rājasa</em>) renunciation, but it gets no merit of surrender of fruits (and so, it recoils).</p>
		<p>18.9. That obligatory action done with a sense of duty which ought to be performed, and that action done with no attachments to the fruits, is (real) surrender. It is (verily) a noble (<em>sāttvika</em>) action.</p>
		<p>18.10. He does not resent at an ill-performed action, nor does he rejoice over a well-performed one. He who is established in nobility or purity, and is (also) wise, with no doubts at all (about the dynamics of recoilless action), is a person who has really renounced.</p>
		<p>18.11. For the wearer of the body, (circumstantially) it is not possible to do away completely with actions. And so, whoever renounces (in the manner stated above) the fruits of action is said to surrender.</p>
		<p>18.12. The one who has not renounced thus gets three kinds of recompense: the undesirable, the desirable and the mixed.</p>
		<p>8.13-14. Hear Me telling you, what is said in the wise counsel (<em>Sāṃkhya</em>) about all actions oriented to attain consummation: </p>
		<p>There are five factors for the consummation of all action: The nature of the field, the nature of the doer, the various instruments of action, their actual functioning, and the fifth, the divine element.</p>
		<p>18.15. Whatever activity a man does, whether by his physical body or by his mind, whether it is just or unjust, these five are the causal factors.</p>
		<p>18.16. It being so, one with imperfect knowledge (of the cosmic dynamics) sees that he is the sole doer. He, the unwise, does not see the truth (of the composite factors).</p>
		<p>18.17. He who, not having the idea that he is the sole doer, and has the right wisdom (of the cosmic dynamics and of recoilless action), even if he were to destroy these worlds, does not really destroy (for he will have done it in accordance with the objective law of cosmic dynamics, and therefore), and is not really bound or tainted.</p>
		<p>18.18. Knowledge, the knowable and the knower form the threefold activising ingredients behind any action. The instrument, the action and the doer form the threefold aspects in a (wholesome) action.</p>
		<p>18.19. Depending on the differences of <em>guṇas</em> (qualities operating in individuals), knowledge, action and the doer are of three kinds. Hear Me say of these, as laid bare in the Analytics of Qualities (<em>guṇa</em> <em>saṃkhyāna</em>, i.e.<em> Sāṃkhya</em>).</p>
		<p>18.20. Know that knowledge to be noble (<em>sāttvika</em>) which discovers the existence of the one indestructible Being in all existence, the undivided and the divided.</p>
		<p>18.21 Know that knowledge to be passionate (<em>rājasa</em>) by which one understands the (single) being as manifold, on the logic of division.</p>
		<p>18.22. That knowledge is ignorant (<em>tāmasa</em>), which takes a part as if it is the whole of action, and so with no reason, as it does not grasp the (whole of) truth, and grasps it partially.</p>
		<p>18.23. That action is noble which is done as obligatory, but with no attachment, with no love or hatred (involved), and with no desire of the fruits thereof.</p>
		<p>18.24. That action is passionate which is done verily with a desire, with egoism, and with much effort.</p>
		<p>18.25. That action is called ignorant, which takes action with related fruits and expends the strength of the doer, involving cruelty and wasted energy.</p>
		<p>18.26. That doer is called noble (<em>sāttvika</em>) who is unattached, egoless, combining firmness with eagerness and not disturbed in success or failure.</p>
		<p>18.27. That doer is said to be passionate, who is full of desire, anxious about the fruits of work, is violent, miserly, unclean and swayed by happiness and pain.</p>
		<p>18.28. That doer is ignorant, who is inept, rude, inert, adamant, having no responsibility of action, lazy, despairing and delaying.</p>
		<p>18.29. Now, listen to Me on qualitative understanding and steadfastness. They are threefold. I shall tell you of them in detail and in full.</p>
		<p>18.30. Whichever understanding knows the dialectics of involvement and liberation, of right action and wrong action, of the fearful (empirical condition) and the fearless (transcendental state), of bondage and freedom, is noble.</p>
		<p>18.31. Whichever understanding makes for righteousness, good action and bad action, not as they are (but differently), is passionate.</p>
		<p>18.32 That understanding which is covered by ignorance, takes unrighteousness for righteousness, and all right meanings by their opposites, is ignorant.</p>
		<p>18.33. That steadfastness (<em>dhṛti</em>) by which the activities of the mind, senses and vital organs are held with firmness and unshaken discipline, is noble.</p>
		<p>18.34. That steadfastness by which activities of <em>dharma</em>, <em>kāma</em> and <em>artha</em> are held associated with fruits incidental to them, is passionate.</p>
		<p>18.35. That steadfastness by which the wicked-minded is not allowed to overcome sleep, fear, grief, despair, arrogance, etc. is ignorant.</p>
		<p>18.40. There is no being on earth or heaven, or (even) of gods, who is free from the three qualities or <em>guṇas</em> of <em>prakṛti</em>.</p>
		<p>18.41. The functions of <em>brāhmaṇas</em>, <em>kṣatriyas</em> and <em>śūdras</em> are differentiated, and arise out of the <em>guṇas</em> of <em>prakṛti</em>.</p>
		<p>18.45 Engrossed in the natural functions of each, every man attains perfection. Listen now (to what I say of them, and how) by following one’s natural functions, each attains perfection.</p>
		<p>18.46. Through performing one’s natural functions, one who worships Him from whom all existents emerge and by whom all this is pervaded, attains perfection.</p>
		<p>18.47. Though destitute of merits, highly redeeming it is to follow one’s own natural functions than by practice taking to functions natural to others. Keeping to functions determined by one’s own nature, one does not incur sins.</p>
		<p>18.48. Even if one’s natural functions are defective, they are not to be abandoned. For verily, in the nature of things, all (finite or imperfect) actions are covered by deficiencies, as smoke covers fire.</p>
		<p>18.49. One who, with an attitude of non-attachment to anything (except to his natural functions as duties to be done by him), has conquered his senses and has no egoistic love, attains by such renunciation the transcendent state of no-action.</p>
		<p>18.50. Attaining to perfection, how one realises the Infinite and what exactly is the orientation of such wisdom, learn from Me in brief (as I tell you).</p>
		<p>18.51-53. With pure understanding, controlling the self with steadfastness, renouncing objects of senses, leaving out both craving and aversion, avoiding crowds, living on minimum food, controlling mind, speech and body, being inclined towards meditative attunement, adoring always detachment, overcoming egoism, physical use of power, arrogance, lust, anger and love of property, and being at peace both within and without, one becomes fit for the Infinite condition (of the transcendent state of no-action).</p>
		<p>18.55. One who attains to the Infinite state is always tranquil, neither worried about nor desiring anything. He treats every being with equal regard (for that is the indication of his) having attained the highest love for Me.</p>
		<p>18.56. Even while engaged in doing his (natural) functions, he depends upon Me (as the strength of all his actions) and by My grace attains to the state, eternal and indestructible.</p>
		<p>18.57. (This is My word to you:) Depend on the essential wisdom of attunement (to action natural to you). Constantly keep Me in your thought (as the foundation and strength of all existents), and willingly offer all your doings to Me.</p>
		<p>18.58. If so, by My grace and will, you will crossover all hurdles (you are experiencing now).</p>
		<p>If, on the other hand, you are not listening to My counsel, by dint of your egoism (or any other reason of false strength etc.), you get yourself destroyed.</p>
		<p>18.59. Depending on (the strength of your) egoism, if you are to think you are not going to fight (the battle in which you are), this, your determination, is going to be falsified (and shattered by the mighty power of the cosmic law which has decided things already). As you are goaded to action (i.e. to fight) by your own (<em>kṣatriya</em>) nature (be contented you are doing it).</p>
		<p>18.60. (Let Me tell you once again:) If by any delusion you do not want to fight, bound by the law of your own nature, you will engage yourself helplessly in fight (about which you have no choice).</p>
		<p>18.61. In the hearts of all beings the Lord exists and spins every being (round their natural functions) set on the wheel of cosmic motion.</p>
		<p>18.62. In every way surrender to Him (i.e. the Lord, in the heart). If so, by His grace, you will attain to the highest state of eternal tranquility.</p>
		<p>18.63. This wisdom, the secret of all secrets, has been unfolded to you by Me (for your fulfillment). (Deeply) think over (this picture of the cosmic force acting), critically analyse it and fully (comprehend the truth of it), and (later, if you want to go against it,) do as you will. (The best choice is given to you: either get your existence fulfilled or get yourself destroyed by the cosmic <em>dynamis</em>).</p>
		<p>18.64. Listen again, to My highest and most secret of words:</p>
		<p>18.66. Abandoning all other (false) resorts (like egoism, pride of position, physical prowess, military strength, etc.) surrender to Me (as the only resort) and I shall free you from all taints (or misgivings). Grieve not (and be assured)!</p>
		<p>Arjuna:</p>
		<p>18.73. Oh, <em>Acyuta</em>! By your grace, my delusions (about myself) are set at naught. My mental bearing (or discernment of my position in the cosmic theme) is rediscovered. I come to be myself, burying my doubts. (With absolute submission) I carry out your orders. (I realise therein lies my fulfillment.)</p>
		<p class="text-center"><strong>OM TAT SAT</strong></p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
