<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Bhagavad Gita</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<div class="footnote">
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-001">
			<p>1.This becomes evident later.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-000">
			<p>2. We are seeing below the exact meaning of these two terms as understood in the context of the Gita.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-003">
			<p>3. Reality is not made through the process of time, but that time is processed by Infinity, which is Reality.<em> The Lord is Kāla-kāra, the Maker of time, as the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad</em><em> puts it,</em> (6.2). He is <em>Kāla-kāla</em>, the Destroyer of time (Ibid. 6.16), <em>Trikālātῑta</em>, Beyond the three times, (<em>Māṇḍūkya</em> <em>Upaniṣad</em>, 1).</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-002">
			<p>4. This becomes clear when we discuss the meaning of ‘yoga’ which Krishna names ‘his own’. See further on.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004">
			<p>5.This applies generally to the treatment of the entire text. The teaching is not relevant only to the context of when and where the words are spoken. It is the philosophy of life and action linked up with Reality as a whole.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008">
			<p>6.“Those ignorant (of the Secret Law of My being and operation) do not know Me who has taken up this human form. They do not understand My transcending dialectics. I am the Supreme Lord of all existence (not a creature born),” (9.11).</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-007">
			<p>7.Or the universe; and how many of this there are and of what magnitude, we cannot imagine.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-006">
			<p>8.One is invited to refer to the usual renderings of this verse which take away the dimensions and potentialities of the cosmic law when they make it apply to the narrow sphere of human social or ethical order only.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-005">
			<p>9.At the absolute level, epistemology and ontology are fused – they are identical.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-010">
			<p>10.“The creatures are shaped and nurtured by food and matter; these (in turn) by the (heavenly downpour of) rains; and these (in turn) by the (collocation of elements in their act of) sacrifice; which again waits for fructification (<em>karma</em>); which is linked with the wider dynamics of the) cosmos (brahma); and this (in turn) with the unalterability of the Cosmic Law (<em>akṣara</em>); which is eternally engaged in self-sacrifice or regeneration (<em>yajña</em>). And so rotates the Cosmic Wheel. In this context (of cosmic dynamics) whoever does not submit to the Law of the Wheel becomes sinful. Such lazy men lead a wasteful life (3.14-16).”</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-009">
			<p>11.Ṛg Veda, X, 121-2; <em>Śatapata Brāhmaṇa</em>, X.2.2.1; XI.1.8.2-4.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-012">
			<p>12. A <em>Haṭha-yogin</em> who may demonstrate successfully the stoppage of pulse, breath etc. has only learnt an art or craft by which he slows down the katabolic process, but ‘why?’ is the question. He attains nothing beyond it, for, when once death is on, there is no getting up. We shall see of this further on.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-011">
			<p>13. If <em>jñāna</em> is theoretical understanding, <em>jñāna</em>-<em>yoga</em> is application of it in practice.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-014">
			<p>14.“Find this entire universe (the moving and the unmoving) existing in a unity in my bosom, and whatever else you want to see! (10.7)” Also: 11.11; 13.30; 18.20 etc.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-013">
			<p>15. “My Nature (<em>prakṛti</em>) is eight-fold: Earth, Water, Fire, Air, Ether, Mind, Egoism and Intellect. This constitutes the inferior stratum. My higher stratum is different and is the enlivening element by which the whole cosmos is sustained. All existents have their source in this. But I am the originator of all creation and the cause of all destruction. Besides My being there exists nothing whatsoever. By Me all this universe of beings is linked (7.4-7) ….” </p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-018">
			<p>16. The significance of a <em>yoga</em>-<em>bhraṣṭa</em> getting back to life is seen here. 6.37, 40-45 and 46 give the finale. And the Lord says, “Be a <em>yogī</em>!”</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-017">
			<p>17.And the four castes are created to serve this Law and in according with this Law (4.13).</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-016">
			<p>18.It is a demand to live, but not to live again; to die, but not to die again.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-015">
			<p>19.The body of the individual and also the larger objective universe outside.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-019">
			<p>20.We come across repeated descriptions of such a person: 2.54-72; 12.13-19; 13.7-11; 14.22-26; 15.3, 5; 16.1-3; 17.11; 17.14-16; 18.20-23, 33, 42, 49, 51-54.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-022">
			<p>21.“If the splendor of a thousand suns were to blaze at once in the sky, that may resemble the glory of the great Self.”</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-021">
			<p>22.It is in the estimation of this, i.e. linking our being with Reality that the Vedāntas differ from each other. </p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-020">
			<p>23.It should be noted with great care that nothing is brought into being which was non-existing. But what was unavailable to our awareness is now made available to consciousness. This operation is in consonance with the Infinite Being, and with the use of the terms <em>avyakta</em> and <em>vyakta</em>, i.e. ‘unmanifest’ and ‘manifest’.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-023">
			<p>24.That we should not go by the divisions of the text of the Gita into chapters thinking that they present different topics is evident here. We will have to gather the statements of Krishna on <em>puruṣa</em> and <em>prakṛti</em> from more than one chapter distributed over the text of the Gita.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-026">
			<p>25.We devote ourselves to this aspect in the next section.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-025">
			<p>26.The organic or dependence relationship of the selves and the world to the Brahman in the schools of Vedānta are vindications of a natural difficulty in maintaining the uniqueness of Brahman as the Absolute against the eternal being (ontologically) of the selves and the world.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-024">
			<p>27.The Lord speaks, for example, of a <em>jīva-loka</em>, the ‘universe of life’, and applies the dynamics of the species to each individual in it, as seen earlier.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-027">
			<p>28.This verse, not usually found in the Editions of the Gita, is found in the Kashmir Recension. It is included here, for it makes clear the meaning of the word <em>‘ubhayaṃ’</em> occuring in 6.38. The Kashmir Recension gives the verse thus:</p>
			<p><em>lipsamānaḥ satāṃ mārgaṃ pramūḍho brahmaṇaḥ pati, aneka citto vibhrānto mohasyaiva vasaṃgataḥ.</em></p>
		</aside>
	</div>
</body>
</html>
