<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Albert Einstein</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-001">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Einstein and the Modern World</h1>
		<p>November 6, 1919 was a significant day not just for physicists but for the entire scientific community. The occasion that marked this day in the annals of world history was the outcome of the joint session of the Royal Society and the Royal Astronomical Society of Britain at Burlington House in Piccadilly, London. Appropriately, a magnificent portrait of one of the greatest scientists overlooked the audience. Paradoxically, it was his theory that was being challenged. Well, the scientist in question was Sir Isaac Newton.</p>
		<p>The bigwigs of the scientific community had gathered to discuss Sir Arthur Eddington’s observations during a solar eclipse that had occurred a few months earlier. Eddington had conducted this study to validate the newly proposed General Theory of Relativity, by a relatively unknown scientist called Albert Einstein.</p>
		<p>Albert Einstein had first presented his theory to the scientific community in 1915 leading to a novel interpretation of gravity. This interpretation, if validated would disprove some of the earlier scientific conceptions built on the basis of Newton’s Law of Gravitation. Scientists were awestruck by Einstein’s theory which conceived gravity as a product of the curvature of the four dimensional space time continuum. However, the theory was still a theory; it was yet to be validated, thus providing tremendous scope for aspiring scientists.</p>
		<p>The theory, among other things, proposed that a ray of light bends or deflects in a gravitational field. Consider, for example, light travelling from a distant star that bends as it approaches the sun because of the sun’s massive gravitational field. Newton’s theory had also suggested a deflection of light. But the magnitude of deflection proposed was different. Newton’s theory predicted that a ray of light deflects by 0.85 seconds of arc, while Einstein’s estimated the deflection at 1.71 seconds of arc.</p>
		<p>Could this curvature be verified to validate Einstein’s theory? There were challenges to experimentation and study; foremost being, the impossibility of viewing a distant star in the presence of a bright sun. A total solar eclipse seemed an opportune moment, as the sun’s light would be obscured by the moon. Nature obliged and gave scientists a chance. A total solar eclipse was to occur on May 29, 1919 at Principe, a small Portuguese island, off the west coast of Africa. Eddington assumed the responsibility of conducting an experiment to verify Newton’s theory. His report was to be tabled before the joint session.</p>
		<p>The war had just ended; Germany and Britain were still enemies. So this scientific debate for many boiled down to the question - who will win? Britain led by Isaac Newton or Germany led by Albert Einstein. The audience, mostly scientists, waited with bated breath in sheer schoolboy spirit, eager to discover the winner of the Ashes! The British mathematician and philosopher, Alfred North Whitehead, who was present at the meeting recollects, “The whole atmosphere of tense interest was exactly that of Greek drama: we were the chorus commenting on the decree of destiny as disclosed in the development of a supreme incident.”</p>
		<p>Frank Dyson (Astronomer Royal of England) presented the report and concluded, “After a careful study of the plates, I am prepared to say that there can be no doubt that they confirm Einstein’s predictions. The results of the expeditions to Sobral and Principe leave little doubt that a deflection of light takes place in the neighbourhood of the sun and that it is of the amount demanded by Einstein’s generalised Theory of Relativity.”</p>
		<p>The President of the Royal Society, Nobel Laureate J. J. Thomson (the physicist credited to have discovered the electron) hailed, “The result is one of the greatest achievements of human thought.”</p>
		<p>History had turned a page and mankind was transported into the post-Newton era. A new physics was in the making. As we shall see later, Einstein had shaken the very foundations of our beliefs; he categorically dismissed our conception of absolute space and absolute time. Einstein was no longer just an anonymous professor in Berlin; his name was suddenly on par with Isaac Newton!</p>
		<p>Einstein became the talk of the town. Relativity was a topic for discussion in newspapers, radio and other media. Commented Einstein, “Currently every coachman and every waiter is debating whether the Relativity Theory is correct”. Einstein, now out of the ivory tower of science had become an instant celebrity. His colleagues stood astonished at the brilliance of his thought; heads of states, queens and princesses longed for his company; people flocked for a glimpse of him. The celebrated filmmaker Charlie Chaplin escorted Einstein to the premiere of his movie City Lights. Surprised by Einstein’s popularity he remarked, “There are people more popular than I!” Once while travelling by train, a co-passenger innocently asked Einstein what he did for a living. Einstein replied, “I am a model posing for newspapers!”</p>
		<p>Sir Arthur Eddington, on discovering the results of his experiment exclaimed, “This is the greatest day in my life!” However, he could not communicate his findings to Einstein directly; war had rendered communication difficult in Germany. The news reached Einstein through a circuitous path via Holland. Einstein opened the telegram, read it and passed it to a student sitting in front of him. The student jumped with joy and asked Einstein, “Aren’t you moved that they have proved your theory to be correct? What would you have done if they had shown it otherwise?” Nonchalantly, Einstein replied, “I would have felt sorry for the Lord I know my theory is correct.” So sure was he.</p>
		<p>Galileo, Newton and Einstein are the pillars of contemporary physics. They have helped us better understand our world and universe; shaped our ideas about space and time; and have provided possible answers to some eternal questions – How did the universe begin? When? What is gravity? What are the forces that govern our universe? If we believe we have discovered answers to such questions, then certainly we owe a great deal to these three men; they belong not just to the countries they come from, not just to the times they lived in, but to the whole of mankind. Galileo gave us the scientific method and stressed the importance of experiments, for, as he said, ‘Theory guides and experiment decides’. Isaac Newton formulated the Laws of Motion and the Law of Universal Gravitation. Einstein then continued the relay race and conceived the Theory of Relativity to give us a new interpretation of gravity.</p>
		<p>Some believe that Einstein is the greatest scientist ever born. This may be true. Albert Einstein is perhaps one name familiar to scientists, common people, students and housewives, thus covering the entire cross section of society. Very few have understood his Theory of Relativity but most have heard of the formula E = mc<sup>2</sup>. Even today Einstein is a symbol of the highest intelligence; one who has achieved the greatest that is humanly conceivable; he represents the upper limit to the human intellect. Some people went to the extent of wondering if there was something special in his brain that was not there in theirs!</p>
		<p>What is this Theory of Relativity? Why is it so famous? What does it tell us? To begin with, the Theory of Relativity challenges our basic assumptions of time and space. Newton’s Laws of Motion and Gravitational Force assume that there is a fixed space and a fixed time which flows like a river. Dimensions of space are absolute in the sense that they are the same for every observer. So is time. What are ten minutes for one person are ten minutes for all.</p>
		<p>The Theory of Relativity, however, shows that both space and time are relative. The length of an object and the time that elapses between events depends upon the speed of the observer. The theory led to the conclusion that almost everything in this universe is relative; there is nothing absolute. Effects of Relativity become particularly pronounced at great speeds. However, it is important to remember that Newton’s Laws are valid at low speeds in the turn of everyday events.</p>
		<p>But when we consider speeds of satellites and planets we have to account for the relativistic effects. Space travel definitely owes a lot to Relativity. If we today boast of an accurate GPS system that guides us to a desired destination, it is because the relativistic effects have been accounted for in the calculations.</p>
		<p>At the other end of the spectrum is the motion inside an atom--the subatomic motion. Newton’s theory was inadequate for the study of motion of subatomic particles, while Einstein’s Relativity facilitated an insight into this realm of motion. We can find the application of Einstein’s theory in many gadgets of everyday use such as photocells, lasers and nuclear power plants.</p>
		<p>Every student today has heard of the formula E = mc<sup>2</sup>, which represents the equivalence of mass and energy and helps calculate the quantity of energy that is released when an atom is split. This formula is commonly and mistakenly associated with the atomic bomb. But in reality, Einstein played no role in the Manhattan project which built the atomic bomb. He in fact was deeply anguished when the first bomb was dropped over Japan. Ironically, he was preaching peace when this event occurred. The redeeming fact is that the same equation enabled mankind to generate large quantities of electrical power in nuclear power stations. The famed formula morphed into an equation of war and peace!</p>
		<p>Though the Theory of Relativity is generally accepted today, attempts to test it and refine it are continuing. Research to testify the theory was conducted as recently as in 2010 and 2011.</p>
		<p>A great lesson one learns from Einstein is to question, question and question. All through his life he never accepted authority--academic, political or cultural. It is this aspect of his personality that made him look beyond the ordinary course of events perceptible to common sense. He opined, “Common sense is the collection of prejudices acquired by age eighteen”. He did not blindly accept what was written in textbooks, what his teachers or parents told him or what most people believed in. He explored, argued, looked for evidence and broke new ground.</p>
		<p>The world wars had initiated a passionate need to redefine life and the world. The early years of the 20<sup>th</sup> century were marked by a new intellectual fervour characterised by non-conformity to established norms and accepted worldviews in every area of human activity. Picasso looked at art in a different way and introduced cubism in painting; James Joyce broke new ground in literature by writing Ulysses; T. S. Eliot wrote Waste Land which pioneered new form and content in poetry writing; Freud published psychoanalysis, initiating a whole new understanding of human behaviour; and Stravinsky altered the very mode of composing music. Einstein lived in this atmosphere where change was inevitable. It was time to break away from routine ideas. Like art, music and literature, science too entered the modern era.</p>
		<p>Einstein’s focus was always at the macro level. He never concerned himself with secondary, superfluous problems in physics. He tackled only fundamental issues. Einstein was often heard saying, “I want to know how God created this world. I am not interested in this or that phenomenon, in the spectrum of this or that element. I want to know His thoughts; the rest are details”. Einstein’s beliefs are an assertion that all great men are seekers of eternal truth; and for Einstein that truth is the unifying principle underlying all Creation.</p>
		<p>At heart, Einstein was a philosopher. He saw beauty and truth in all of God’s creation. This beauty he perceived in mathematics; discovering beauty and simplicity in scientific theories became the pursuit of his life. It was because of this conviction that he rejected some of the outcomes of Quantum Mechanics, a branch of physics he helped develop. It is also true that he tried in vain, for a large part of his later life, to unify electromagnetic and gravitational forces. Now in 2014, scientists have made substantial progress in this direction. In fact two more forces, Strong and Weak have been included. But we are not sure whether the simplicity and beauty that Einstein yearned for has been achieved. Till his death he remained a pilgrim in pursuit of truth--Is there a unified theory?</p>
		<p>His personal life was hardly a bed of roses. His life in school and college was not very enjoyable because of his disrespect and scepticism towards high-handed teachers who had little interest in arousing the curiosity of children or in making learning enjoyable. Securing a job to make a living also proved difficult. Of course, later in life, his scientific achievements took him to the highest academic and professional echelons.</p>
		<p>A scientist of Einstein’s calibre who has contributed substantially to the furtherance of knowledge and has also been conferred the Nobel Prize usually occupies the high chair of director of an institution or university and creates a conducive platform to guide next-generation scientists. Einstein did not like to be bound by such affiliations. A free spirit, he nurtured an impressive band of physicists such as Niels Bohr, Max Born, Irwin Schrodinger, Heisenberg, Robert Oppenheimer and de Broglie, in whose leadership modern physics developed phenomenally. It seemed as though a Nobel Prize was a minimum requirement for a person to be associated with Einstein!</p>
		<p>Einstein never chased fame or glory. There was no trace of pomp or conceit in thought or action. He commented at the peak of his fame, “When I was young all I wanted and expected from life was to sit quietly in some corner doing my work without public paying attention to me. And now see what has become of me!”</p>
		<p>Einstein preserved a childlike innocence and curiosity about all things; he never lost himself to dress; he abhorred flattery. He never lusted for power. He could have become the president of Israel if only he had accepted the invitation. He preferred to lead the life of an ordinary man. Humility was his trademark. When he was forced to write his autobiography, he wrote one and called it his obituary! Besides it turned out to be more a history of science than an insight into his life and work. It did not mention any biographical details, names of family or relatives. Instead, it included names of great scientists, and it did mention the compass of which we will read later.</p>
		<p>Not that Einstein became a recluse, totally absorbing himself in science. As he became famous he took upon himself several social and moral responsibilities. He wept for his fellow Jews and openly promoted their cause. He greatly admired Mahatma Gandhi’s philosophy of non-violence, peace and self-governance and was deeply grieved when he was assassinated. He pleaded and dissuaded the president of America from making the atomic bomb, though he had initially urged the president to develop the bomb, mistakenly assuming rival countries to be engaged in developing it. He continually appealed to world leaders to promote peace.</p>
		<p>Thus Einstein was a great humanitarian; a human being whom mankind will not forget, and one whose legacy will live forever. He is a phenomenon that flashed upon the surface of earth. He will be remembered as one of the greatest men that ever lived. He has been compared with Picasso, Freud and Gandhi, and hailed as a genius of the twentieth century.</p>
		<p>Perhaps the best description of what Einstein stands for today is given by Maria Spiropulu, an experimental physicist at Enrico Fermi Institute, University of Chicago, in her essay, “Where is Einstein?” –</p>
		<p>“And where is Einstein today? In our research, our studies, our experiments, our calculations. In college textbooks from physics to the history of culture. In our witticisms. In the hearts of our friends and colleagues who call in the middle of the night with some preposterous idea about how to solve a preposterous problem. In the hearts of the artists and businessmen and electricians and philosophers we meet who want to know what E = mc<sup>2</sup> really means as soon as they know we are physicists. In intellectuals who know how to be cute and modest and play the media. In those who take sides. In every demonstration against nuclear weapons. In all young people who exhibit a slight disrespect for authority and all old people in authority who are radicals. In those who have fled from tyrannical and oppressive families and narrow minded educators. In all our students who can solve a problem we cannot. In all the people we think as innocent geniuses who take themselves not very seriously. In all stubborn and difficult physicists who think of physics problems as a reason for being. And in all those who tackle problems they know they can’t or won’t solve.”</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
	</section>
</body>
</html>
