<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Albert Einstein</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-005">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">The Miracle Year -Annus Mirabilis</h1>
		<p>In the life-time of a scientist, the age between twenty-four and twenty-six is often seen as a period of exceptional intellectual achievement. There can be no better examples than those of Einstein and Newton. Isaac Newton in 1666, at the age of twenty-four made his mark in physics, by formulating the Law of Gravity, inventing calculus and exploring optics, and thus changed the course of physics. The year 1666 has been called Newton’s Annus Mirabilis. Einstein’s Annus Mirabilis was 1905.</p>
		<p>In May 1905 Einstein wrote a letter to his friend and a fellow Olympian which read thus:</p>
		<p>“Dear Habicht!</p>
		<p>
			<em>…… I promise you four papers in return. The first deals with radiation and energy properties of light and is very revolutionary,  as you will see if you send me your work first. The second paper is a determination of the true size of atoms. The third proves that bodies on the order of magnitude 1/1000 mm suspended in liquids must already perform an observable random motion that is produced by thermal motion. Such movement of suspended bodies has actually been observed by physiologists who call it Brownian Motion.</em>
		</p>
		<p>The fourth paper is only a rough draft at this point, and is on electrodynamics of moving bodies, which employs a modification of the theory of space and time; the purely kinematic part of this paper will surely interest you.</p>
		<p>The first paper dealing with Photoelectric Effect fetched him the Nobel Prize (not his work on Relativity, as is popularly believed). When light impinges on a metallic surface, electrons are knocked off and an electric current can be generated by connecting the metallic surface to a circuit. This phenomenon is called the Photoelectric Effect. It was a known fact that on heating, an object released small packets or chunks of energy called Quanta. Einstein proved that this is also true of light waves and called this paper, ‘On a heuristic point of view Concerning the Production and Transformation of Light’. What is significant is the use of the word heuristic (meaning that which is not rigorously proved), implying his reservations with the concept of quanta. Nevertheless, an entire discipline of study called Quantum Mechanics came into existence. Einstein was never comfortable with this subject and battled with its supporters all his life. Even in the last of his papers, Einstein maintained the same stand on the subject. Ironically, it was his own theory that gave rise to quantum mechanics.</p>
		<p>Even after the publication of his revolutionary paper which won him a Nobel Prize, he was only Mr Einstein; he had no doctorate. Embarking on it, he prepared a dissertation and submitted it to the University of Zurich and also as a paper to the journal, Annalen der Physik. The paper was titled, A New Determination of Molecular Dimensions. Unlike his previous papers, he made sure that he was on safe ground and avoided all controversy. He was awarded a doctorate for this work and he became Dr. Einstein.</p>
		<p>That fourth paper wherein he introduced The Special Theory of Relativity was of interest not just to Habicht but to the entire world. Scientists including Newton till then had accepted the concepts of space and time to be absolute entities. What are ten seconds for one individual are ten seconds for everyone. So are ten metres, for example. Einstein debunked this notion and proposed that the perception of time and space was dependent upon the relative speed between the observer and the object. He explained that at low speeds, the differences between what is observed by a stationary observer and a moving observer were negligible; but at speeds comparable to that of light, the difference was enormous leading to phenomena such as Length Contraction, Time Dilation and Twin Paradox among others. These phenomena have been briefly dealt with in Part 2 of the book. It is worth mentioning here that according to Einstein the speed of light is the maximum one can hope to achieve. In other words nothing can travel faster than light. Only a man who is not entangled in the shallow plane of common sense can deduce that space and time are relative and that some of our common experiences may feel different at high speeds. Thus, Einstein’s theory disturbed certain fundamental notions of perception.</p>
		<section class="level2 unnumbered" id="id-005.01">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">E=mc<sup>2</sup></h2>
			<p>E=mc<sup>2</sup> has become synonymous with Albert Einstein. In this equation, E is energy, m is mass and c is the speed of light. It is amazing that in his miracle year, 1905, he formulated not just the Special Theory of Relativity but also deduced that mass and energy are equivalent. He presented it to the scientific community in a paper entitled Does the Inertia of a Body depend on its Energy Content?' The paper was published on 27<sup>th</sup> of September, in Annalen der Physik. It is as revolutionary as his Theory of Relativity. Unfortunately, it is also the paper that led to Einstein being wrongly and unfairly identified as the father of the atomic bomb.</p>
			<p>The significance of this equation is that mass and energy are associated with each other. When we say that mass is m, it is automatically associated with an x amount of energy calculated by mc<sup>2</sup>. At the same time, a given amount of energy is always associated with a certain amount of mass. When we gift someone an object weighing a kilogram, we are gifting 25 billion kilowatt hours of energy! A small raisin could supply the energy needs of New York for a day! An electric bulb that radiates 100 watts for 100 years uses less than 1/3000 gm of mass.</p>
			<p>It seemed as if all his knowledge and ingenuity was simmering beneath the surface to suddenly erupt into concrete theories and the result was four papers presenting discoveries which caused unprecedented breakthroughs in science. A clerk in the patent office, working after-hours, produces such phenomenal work! All in a single year! Well, that is the genius of Einstein!</p>
			<p>Please refer Part 2 of the book for a discussion of Einstein’s papers, including the Special Theory of Relativity.</p>
		</section>
		<section class="level2 unnumbered" id="id-005.02">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">How did the theory come about?</h2>
			<p>Scientists and laymen alike have been curious about the process by which the Theory of Relativity came about. What were its sources and inspiration? What was Einstein doing in the final hours leading to the epiphany? What was the struggle preceding the ultimate discovery? Unfortunately there is nothing recorded for posterity. The only source we have is Einstein’s 1922 speech in Japan.</p>
			<p>We understand that it was a wonderful day. He had spent the afternoon with his friend Besso. Einstein was stuck at a critical juncture in his theory formulation and found it impossible to proceed. The night was typical--cigars, pipes and conversation. Of course, he scribbled on the back of letters, bills and random pieces of paper, as was his custom. His conversation with Besso must have triggered something. In retrospect, he has said, “Suddenly I understood where to find the key to this problem.” The next day he rushed to Besso and shouted out, “Thank you; I have completely solved my problem.” Apart from this we have no indication whatever of the driving forces behind Einstein’s theory. Where did he start? What were the steps he took? We can at best only guess and try to reconstruct the way he arrived at the theory. We should not forget that Einstein as a young boy was fascinated with the compass and obsessed with the speed of light. These may have influenced his thinking.</p>
			<p>There is also a school of thought that believes that Henri Poincare had actually developed the Theory of Relativity in 1904. It is also believed that though Einstein was aware of it, he never acknowledged it. The paper by Poincare does anticipate ideas that form Einstein’s theory. But it is held that he was not bold enough to propose the theory as Einstein did.</p>
		</section>
		<section class="level2 unnumbered" id="id-005.03">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Did Mileva help Einstein develop the theory?</h2>
			<p>Mileva and Einstein as we know had graduated from the same institution and had acquired the same diploma. She too had studied physics and mathematics. There has been some speculation as to whether Mileva and Einstein had worked together on the Theory of Relativity. To substantiate this claim, a letter written by Einstein to Mileva is often quoted – “How happy and proud I will be when the two of us will have brought our work on relative motion to a conclusion.” In a letter to his friend Habicht, he says that the two were dead drunk under the table when the work was finished. In fact, Einstein has praised his wife for help with mathematics. Add to this the rumour that the first draft of the Relativity paper had Mileva’s name as co-author.</p>
			<p>This issue has been discussed in a few conferences. Of course, the media has taken it up seriously. An impressive television documentary compels us to believe that Mileva was an active collaborator. It has however been pointed out that Mileva never claimed her participation even after their marriage broke down. Their son Hans Albert has stated that Mileva did help his father with his mathematical work, but no creative idea originated in her.</p>
			<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		</section>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
