<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Albert Einstein</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-006">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Professor at Last</h1>
		<p>His doctorate helped Einstein secure a promotion in the patent office. He became a technical expert, second class; his salary increased to 4500 francs.</p>
		<p>Einstein expected that there would be a stream of letters and comments about his theory in the journals. But surprisingly nobody seemed to care. However, one person of repute did; Max Planck, a leading physicist of the time. Though he had dismissed the concept of light quanta proposed byEinstein, he now accepted the Theory and also propagated it among his friends.. When Einstein received a letter of appreciation from Planck he felt greatly relieved. Planck further developed the theory and published papers about it in 1906 and 1907.</p>
		<p>Following Planck’s recommendation, one of his assistants, Max von Laue, sought an appointment with Einstein. When he arrived in Bern, Laue was astonished to learn that Einstein was not a professor at the University of Bern but a clerk in a government office. When Laue arrived at the patent office to meet Einstein, there was another surprise awaiting him. Laue did not recognise the shirt sleeved unassuming man who walked past him as Einstein. Only after he walked past the reception area a few times, did Laue recognise the father of the Theory of Relativity. The two had a long discussion. It was the beginning of a lifelong friendship. In 1911, Laue wrote the first ever book on Relativity. In 1914, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for his discovery of the diffraction of X-rays by crystals.</p>
		<p>Einstein did not relax even after so many ground breaking publications. In 1906, he wrote another paper on Brownian Motion. In 1907, he completed his formulation of equivalence of mass and energy, namely, the paper on the formula E = mc<sup>2</sup>. In this paper he laid the foundation for another masterpiece, the General Theory of Relativity.</p>
		<p>Hermann Minkowski, Professor of Mathematics at the Zurich Polytechnic remembered that he had called Einstein a lazy dog. In December 1907, Minkowski presented a brilliant paper on Relativity at Gottingen University. The teacher had followed the student.</p>
		<p>This is not to say that the Theory of Relativity was received with open arms everywhere. There were cries of dissent. Most people found it difficult to grasp and appreciate. New ideas about space and time were just not acceptable. The rejection came not only from physicists; philosophers and laymen also joined.</p>
		<p>Einstein was pained by the fact that he was still a government officer carrying out mundane duties. He wished he was researching at a university. Towards the end of 1907, he sought the position of a Privatdozent at the University of Bern. This was the lowest academic position in any German university and apprenticeship to become a professor. Einstein sent copies of all seventeen research papers that he had written along with the application. He was also required to submit an unpublished paper as a Habilitation Thesis, as it was called. Einstein assumed that he would be excused from sending an unpublished paper, given his brilliant publication record. Only one member from the selection committee supported Einstein’s view. The rest demanded that he write a habilitation thesis. Einstein refused to do so and was not selected. It is also stated that Einstein submitted his 1905 paper on Relativity as his habilitation thesis. The paper was rejected by the committee on grounds that it was incomprehensible.</p>
		<p>Einstein was naturally upset. One wonders whether a person of Einstein’s calibre should have suffered such humiliation. However, we should realise that he was still not famous. His theory had had only a limited exposure. Einstein wrote a letter to Marcel Grossmann with whom he had studied at Zurich Polytechnic and who was now a professor of mathematics there. He begged his friend to advise him regarding a position at a technical school at Winterthur. Could he meet somebody responsible for selecting staff and try to impress upon him that Einstein was a worthy choice? He also applied for the position of a mathematics teacher at the Zurich Canton Gymnasium. In his application he mentioned that he could also teach physics. There were 21 applicants; he did not make it to the shortlist of three candidates!</p>
		<p>Luck did favour Einstein at last. He received a postcard from Professor Alfred Kleiner, who had rejected and later accepted his thesis at the Zurich University. It was his wish to appoint Einstein as a professor at his university. He advised Einstein to pursue the position of a privatdozent in Bern and to report any developments. Einstein did so and also submitted a habilitation thesis which was an extension to his work on photoelectric effect. There was no opposition to his appointment; in 1908 Einstein became a privatdozent at the University of Bern.</p>
		<p>The job was not particularly attractive. First of all it did not pay him a salary. The only monetary benefit was in the form of tips the students gave. There were only three or four students. This job was in addition to his duties at the patent office. Being a privatdozent seemed a burden; but it had to be borne if he wanted to become a professor.</p>
		<p>In 1908, he started lecturing on the Theory of Heat to a class of three students comprising his friend Besso, and his colleagues from the patent office, Schenk and Chavan. He lectured twice a week at 7am, on Tuesdays and Saturdays. Einstein had just enough time to reach his workplace after the lecture. In winter, he taught the Theory of Radiation when he had an additional student, Stern. By the summer of 1909, Stern was the only student in class. The course was cancelled.</p>
		<p>Einstein was hardly a good lecturer. Moreover, his attire was awful. He resembled a typical Russian refugee of those days. There were many Russian Jews in Germany who were, “poor, ill-clad, unkempt and therefore frowned upon.”</p>
		<p>His sister Maja was a student at the same university. She wanted to listen to one of his lectures so she enquired the doorman about the room where he lectured. She was smartly dressed. The doorman was surprised and asked, “What ….. that Russian is your brother?”</p>
		<p>Yet Kleiner persisted in his efforts to make Einstein a professor. He persuaded the University of Zurich to create the position of Associate Professor of Theoretical Physics, which, he said would enhance the prestige of the university. There was an obstacle. Friedrich Adler, a close friend of Einstein, sought the same position. The counsellor of the university had, in fact, urged his nomination. Adler, the son of the founder and leader of the Austrian Democratic Party, was more tuned to politics than to theoretical physics. The two candidates met and decided that it was Einstein who deserved the position. Alder withdrew his application.</p>
		<p>At this juncture, Kleiner made a surprise visit to one of Einstein’s lectures in Bern, probably at the request of the selection committee in Zurich. He expressed his dissatisfaction with Einstein’s lecturing skills and Einstein replied, “I certainly don’t demand to be made a university professor at Zurich.” Kleiner reported to the University of Zurich thus; “Einstein holds monologues and is far away from becoming a teacher”. To make matters worse Kleiner’s comments were circulated among the staff at the university. Einstein was beginning to feel that a university position was becoming a mirage.</p>
		<p>To improve his chances Einstein volunteered to give a talk at the Physics Society in Zurich. The lecture was delivered after meticulous preparation. Kleiner was now impressed and promised to recommend Einstein for the position. He wrote a very strong letter of support to the university that read thus:</p>
		<p>“Einstein ranks as one of the most important theoretical physicists. He has been recognised as one such following his publication of the Theory of Relativity. He will prove his worth as a teacher.”</p>
		<p>The faculty met in secret. Einstein’s Jewish descent was the next hurdle. But Kleiner came to his rescue and commented that there was nothing peculiar about him even though he was a Jew. The faculty was convinced. Einstein was appointed an Associate Professor with ten votes in favour and one abstention. However, he was disappointed to discover that the salary offered was lower than what he earned at the patent office. He rejected the offer. Soon the university made a better offer and Einstein accepted it.</p>
		<p>During his last days at the patent office he received an attractive large envelope. As usual Einstein did not open it and threw it into the waste paper basket. It was an invitation from the University of Geneva to receive an honorary doctorate. The authorities persuaded him through one of his friends to accept the offer.</p>
		<p>He submitted his resignation letter to the patent office on July 6, 1909, effective from October 15. It was not easy to leave that office, “where I hatched my most beautiful ideas and where we had such good times together”, he told Besso.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
	</section>
</body>
</html>
