<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Albert Einstein</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-012">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Grand Unification of Forces<br /> and Einstein’s Cosmology</h1>
		<p>Einstein’s quest through physics was to find a way of unifying the theories of gravitation and electromagnetism. Attempts had been made in the past but with little success. German physicist Hermann Weyl tried to extend the geometry of General Relativity to include electromagnetism in 1918. Theodor Kaluza another German physicist added a fifth dimension. Oskar Klein, Niels Bohr’s student also made an attempt. The next was Sir Arthur Eddington himself. He came very close to achieving a unification of gravity and electricity.</p>
		<p>In 1923, Einstein wrote a paper titled To Understand Gravitational and Electromagnetic Fields as One. The media seemed to have been starved for some time now. There had been no news from Einstein since 1919. Hence, no sooner had Einstein’s paper become public, out came the headlines, “Einstein describes His Newest theory”, “Unintelligible to Laymen”. Einstein gave interviews and said that his aim was not limited to a unification of gravity and electromagnetism. He endeavoured to remove some of the anomalies that existed in quantum mechanics.</p>
		<p>However, he soon discovered that his arguments in this paper were flawed. In 1929 he wrote a five page paper and corrected the flaws. News spread and about a hundred journalists from all over the world made a beeline at his house on Haberlandstrasse in Berlin. Einstein had to take shelter in his doctor’s villa! The headline, “Einstein on the Verge of Great Discovery: Resents Intrusion” appeared. However Einstein gave newspaper interviews even before the paper was published. “I want to resolve the duality of natural laws into unity.” But an editor from the New York Times discovered a mathematical error in one of the equations. He received the bonus of being admitted into the house.</p>
		<p>When the paper was published, the Prussian Academy printed 1000 copies, followed by another 3000 copies; very unusual for a scientific paper. Selfridges, a department store in London pasted the paper on the window. The paper in its entirety was cabled to the New York Herald Tribune. The Wesleyan University in Connecticut bought the manuscript paying an undisclosed sum of money. The New York Herald Tribune wanted to print the entire paper. But printing the Greek letters and symbols posed a problem. Professors were employed to develop a decoding system and reconstruct the paper. The paper even provoked the interest of the American church.</p>
		<p>The public and the press are easily excitable, riding high on sensationalism; but the scientific community looks for facts, is convinced only by proof. Wolfgang Pauli, Austrian physicist felt that Einstein had ignored physics and crossed into mathematics. He relied too much on the beauty of the theory! He was sure that Einstein would abandon his theory within a year. This did happen. Einstein revised his theory in 1931 and told Pauli, “You rascal, you were correct.”</p>
		<p>The quest for a unified theory continued even after Einstein’s death. Now it is recognised that there are four fundamental forces in nature--Gravitational, Electromagnetic, Strong Interactions and Weak Interactions.</p>
		<p>Strong and weak interactions (forces) are present only within the atom. Gravity and electromagnetic forces act everywhere. The only inter-planetary force present is gravitational force that governs planetary motion and interactions.</p>
		<p>In his attempt to unify gravity and electromagnetic forces, Einstein achieved only limited success. In fact, he spent almost twenty five years trying to improve his model. The major cause of failure seems to be his non-acceptance of quantum mechanics. The search for a unified theory drove him to solitude. In the words of German biographer Jürgen Neffe, “It was his mania, mantra and martyrdom.”</p>
		<p>In 1963, Sheldon Glashow, American theoretical physicist, struck a unification of weak forces (interactions) and electromagnetic forces through the Electroweak Theory. In 1967 Abdus Salam, from Pakistan and Steven Weinberg, American theoretical physicist took this a step further with their W and Z particles. They were awarded the Nobel Prize in 1979.</p>
		<p>Today, the Theory of Everything, TOE, still attempts unification, of gravity as well. The String Theory claims to unify the forces. But many scientists have raised doubts. The Loop Quantum Gravity tries to reconcile Relativity and quantum mechanics.</p>
		<section class="level2 unnumbered" id="id-012.01">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Einstein’s Cosmology</h2>
			<p>By 1917, Einstein had presented his theory proposing the impact of gravitation on our notion of space and time. He then extended his theory to encompass the entire universe, not just the solar system that we live in. To this end, he relied on the Cosmological Principle which states that the universe is homogeneous and isotropic; homogeneous to mean that it has the same properties everywhere and isotropic to mean that properties are the same in whatever direction we look.</p>
			<p>He was startled when he applied his equations to this universe. The result indicated that the universe is neither static nor stable; and that the universe must either be expanding or contracting! He was not sure which way the universe was going. Einstein consulted astronomers as it was not his area of expertise. They concluded that the stars neither approached the sun nor receded from it. But they did not realise that this is true only for our galaxy and not for the entire universe.</p>
			<p>Einstein opted for a quick fix solution to the problem. He introduced what is called a Cosmological Constant (denoted by l) into his calculations, which was nothing more than a fudging factor to align the calculations to the experimental results. The way Einstein used this factor influenced gravity on a very large scale. The constant was capable of both expanding and contracting space. The theory had the acceptance of other scientists; it had come from Einstein; so it must be correct!</p>
			<p>Alexander Friedmann a brilliant Russian scientist, working at the University of St. Petersburg, chose the same problem and took Einstein’s equations of General Theory of Relativity as the starting point. He published his results in 1922, which clearly showed how different values of Cosmological Constant yielded different models of the universe. With the constant set to zero, his study gave a model which was vulnerable to gravity’s pull. The universe was indeed, dynamic!</p>
			<p>Einstein would not accept this theory and held that the work was flawed; mathematically correct but physically not realistic. Friedmann stuck to his ideas. However, he met an untimely death in 1925.</p>
			<p>It was left for a Belgian scientist Georges Lemaitre working at the University of Louvain to continue the race. By 1927, he too discovered that the universe was dynamic. He was a cosmologist and was able to grasp the physical implications of the theory. He was convinced that the universe was expanding. According to the General Theory of Relativity, our universe is like a mattress in four dimensions called the space time continuum. It is as if this mattress is bulging day by day like a balloon.</p>
			<p>If the universe is expanding, then it becomes smaller and smaller as we go back in time. Ultimately we reach a stage when the universe collapses to a point. Perhaps our universe emerged from this point or singularity. This is the Big Bang Theory that explains the beginning of the universe. The theory says that the universe started with an explosion 13.7 billion years ago.</p>
			<p>Lemaitre and Einstein met several times and discussed the issue. Einstein also visited Mount Wilson Laboratory where he met the American astronomer, Edwin Hubble. Hubble with his 100 inch reflector telescope had made amazing discoveries. By measuring the red shift of the star spectra it became clear that the galaxies were moving away from us. Einstein was now convinced that the universe is really expanding. He confessed later, “Cosmological constant is a great blunder in my life.”</p>
			<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		</section>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
