<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Albert Einstein</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-013">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Goodbye to Germany</h1>
		<p>“Take a very good look at it. You will never see it again,” Einstein told Elsa as they left for America after procuring the visa in December, 1932 to honour the contract with Caltech and Millikan. Why did he make such a statement? Had he an intuition by then that he may never return to Germany? How else can we explain the thirty pieces of baggage he carried for a three month stay?</p>
		<p>It was in America that Einstein heard the most disturbing news of his life. On January 30, 1933 Adolf Hitler had taken over as the chancellor of Germany. Very soon he realised that whatever he had told Elsa when he left Caputh, was already proving to be true. He would not go back to Germany. About that time an earthquake struck Los Angeles. He felt the ground beneath his feet shake; not because of the earthquake, but because of the disturbing developments in Germany.</p>
		<p>Back in Germany, Nazis swung into action. Einstein’s apartment was raided even as Margot (Elsa’s daughter) was inside. Her husband Dimitri Marianoff was not home. But he was wise enough to instruct Margot to pass on all of Einstein’s papers to the French Embassy. She did so and joined her husband in Paris. Ilse (Elsa’s other daughter) and her husband managed to escape to Holland. Nazis ransacked the house three more times in the next two days. What they expected to find there, no one knows.</p>
		<p>Einstein could not go back to Germany. Even the German Consul in New York, Paul Schwartz, warned him against such a decision, “They will drag you by your hair if you go!”</p>
		<p>After ransacking his Berlin apartment, the Nazis vandalised his house in Caputh, which was very close to his heart. Even his boat was confiscated. When he learnt of it, Einstein remarked, “It seems I had a few visitors to honour my house when I was away. They could have come when I was there.”</p>
		<p>His stay in Caltech concluded and Einstein left America in March 1933. His destination now was Antwerp in Belgium, not Berlin. As soon as he landed, he rushed to the German consulate in Brussels and returned his German passport, and in effect his German citizenship. He also submitted his resignation to the position he held in the Prussian Academy of Science. His colleague Planck was relieved that Einstein voluntarily quit the Academy. His act of throwing away the German citizenship infuriated the Nazis. As revenge, they revoked his citizenship in the spirit of hanging a dead person!</p>
		<p>Planck paid rich tribute to Einstein in a speech at the Academy- “…(through him) physics has experienced a deepening significance which can be matched only by that of the achievements of Johannes Kepler and Isaac Newton.”</p>
		<p>Meanwhile the Nazis banned Jewish teachers and students from Berlin University and confiscated their credentials. Soon Jews were disqualified from holding any official position in Germany. The Jews thus were left with no option but to flee the country. Fourteen Nobel Laureates and twenty six professors of theoretical physics, including Niels Bohr, Otto Stern, Enrico Fermi and Leo Szilard, fled Germany. When Planck tried to warn Hitler about the dangers of Nazi dictates and actions, the latter replied, “If by dismissing these scientists we have to do without science, we can do so for a few years.”</p>
		<p>A big rally of nearly forty thousand German patriots was held near the Berlin Opera House. The crowd celebrated the death of Jewish Intellectualism by burning thousands of books looted from libraries. They considered it an act of liberating German science from the clutches of the Jews. Philip Lenard, one of the opponents of Einstein, was jubilant as he was appointed the chief of Aryan Science in Germany.</p>
		<section class="level2 unnumbered" id="id-013.01">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">In Belgium</h2>
			<p>Einstein decided to live in Belgium. He rented a house in the famous resort Le Coq sur Mer. Einstein, Elsa, Helen Dukas and Walther Meyer lived here. Meanwhile, rumour spread that the Nazis offered a price of $5000 for his head! Pointing to his head, Einstein laughed it off saying, “I did not know this was worth so much”. The local government took the rumour seriously and assigned two policemen to guard his house. When a friend, Philipp Frank, visited Einstein, the guards pounced on him!</p>
			<p>Getting a job was no problem, if only he was prepared to accept one. “I have more professorships than original ideas,” he joked. Apart from the Princeton offer, Einstein had offers from Brussels, Paris and Madrid.</p>
			<p>Another widely asked question is why Einstein did not take up a position in the Jerusalem University which he had helped establish. Apparently, he had many grievances against the university administration; formost among them was that the university had compromised academic standards in making some appointments.the administration had compromised academic standards. Further, he had developed differences with Weizmann. So when the university did extend him an invitation, he rejected it.</p>
			<p>Einstein had met Elizabeth, the queen of Belgium on one of his tours. Now that he was in Brussels, he was invited to the palace often. The queen liked music and loved to play the violin with Einstein. The two had private sessions, lunches and dinners.</p>
			<p>In Belgium, Einstein found it necessary to move away from pacifism. Now that Germany was waging war with other countries, he felt that it was appropriate for other countries to fight back. In this context, compulsory military training was perfectly in order. Einstein aired these views openly. He was after all a scientist, and a scientist can change his opinion as and when new evidence comes up!</p>
			<p>Another instance that exhibits Einstein’s shift from pacifism to militarism is when the Belgian government had jailed two persons who had desisted military training. Pacifists everywhere were agitating for their release. The king wanted to exploit the good relations Einstein shared with the queen. Einstein was requested not to support the pacifists or press for their release. He readily accepted and also released a statement to that effect.</p>
			<p>He wrote to the leaders about his departure from pacifism. Newspapers gave wide publicity and his friends were outraged. Romain Rolland fumed, “Einstein is brilliant in science, but indecisive and inconsistent outside of it.”</p>
		</section>
		<section class="level2 unnumbered" id="id-013.02">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Adieu to son and Mileva</h2>
			<p>Einstein learnt that Eduard’s mental illness had become worse and that he had been confined to an asylum near Zurich. His friends insisted that he pay a visit. He visited Eduard and two played the violin.</p>
			<p>Mileva was well aware that Einstein could not return to Germany. She was generous enough to invite Einstein and Elsa to live in her apartment. From Zurich Einstein went to Oxford to keep an engagement. Little did he realise that he had seen Mileva and Eduard for the last time.</p>
			<p>The lecture in Oxford was followed by one in Glasgow and then Einstein returned to Belgium but not for long. He made another trip to England. During this visit he met Winston Churchill who was then a member of the Opposition in the British Parliament. Germany’s disarmament featured in their talks. He also met the former Prime Minister Lloyd George. After the meeting Einstein was requested to sign in the visitors’ book. In the Address column he wrote ohne (meaning, without in German). The MP who had hosted Einstein mentioned this in his speech to the Parliament. He also expressed that it was indeed England's good fortune to offer Einstein shelter at Oxford. Einstein’s visits to Oxford were slated to become a regular feature.</p>
			<p>Einstein lost Ehrenfest, a dear friend in the most tragic circumstances. Ehrenfest was separated from his wife, who lived in Leiden. His son suffered from Down’s syndrome. During a visit he shot his son in the face; the son lost his eyes. Later Ehrenfest shot himself. Einstein had lost a sincere friend whom he had helped in many ways. Einstein felt unnerved; added to his trepidation was the rumour of Nazi conspiracy.</p>
			<p>England seemed safer; he travelled again to London. He addressed a gathering of more than nine thousand people in the Royal Albert Hall. He appears to have spoken in English and stressed the need to protect intellectual and individual freedom, “Without such freedom, there would have been no Shakespeare, no Goethe, no Newton, no Faraday, no Pasteur, and no Lister.”</p>
			<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		</section>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
