<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Albert Einstein</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-022">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">ABOUT AUTHOR</h1>
		<p>Born in India (1946), K. Srinivas (who writes under the name Sydney Srinivas), obtained his Ph.D from the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore in 1976. Later he worked at the University of Sydney in the School of Aerospace, Mechanical and Mechatronic Engineering for over three decades. He also worked at the University Karlsruhe in Germany, and the Universities of Tokyo, Niigata and Tohoku in Japan.</p>
		<p>Srinivas has written extensively on topics related to science. He has published biographies of scientists and several fictional works in Kannada and English. His articles have been published in several newspapers and magazines. He has also produced programs for the community television in Sydney. He is now retired and lives in Sydney.</p>
		<p>Srinivas is the author of ‘Srinivasa Ramanujan’, published by Prism Books Pvt Ltd., in 2012.</p>
			<h2 >Srinivasa Ramanujan</h2>
			<p>By Sydney Srinivas, (with an introduction to the Mathematics of Ramanujan by Michael D Hirschhorn), published by Prism Books Private Limited, 2012.</p>
			<p>Srinivasa Ramanujan was a world-class mathematician from India. Born in 1887, in the state of Tamilnadu, India, Ramanujan proved to be a prodigy when still in high school. His extra-ordinary mathematical powers came to light during his college days. His undivided attention to mathematical study took its toll; he failed his exams and had to give up formal studies. But he continued to tackle complex mathematical problems in the humble environs of his home. Endowed with extraordinary mathematical insight, he was able to propose, without proof, more than 3000 theorems; highly qualified mathematicians are still trying to prove them.</p>
			<p>Encouraged by his mentors, Ramanujan sent some of his findings to Prof. Hardy of Cambridge University, who at once invited him to be his colleague. They worked together for five years and contributed significantly to Partitions, Continued Fractions and other branches of mathematics. Ramanujan was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society and Fellow of the Trinity College. However, he was forced to return to India due to ill health;he died when he was only 32.</p>
			<p>In this book, Sydney Srinivas gives an impressive and lucid account of Ramanujan’s life. Apart from many visuals and photographs, it contains numerous anecdotes from a life that oscillated between agony and ecstasy. The author traces Ramanujan’s life as a child, through his student life and as clerk at the Madras port and his struggles in England. The great influence of his mother Komalathammal in his life is clearly evoked.</p>
			<p>A special feature of the book is the short introduction by Dr Hrischhorn, an eminent Ramanujan scholar, to Taxicab Number, Partition Numbers and Continued Fraction, some of the complex mathematical problems that Ramanujan tackled.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
