<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Prophet</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-017">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Self-Knowledge</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">A</span>nd a man said, Speak to us of Self-Knowledge.</p>
		<p>And he answered, saying:</p> 
		<p>Your hearts know in silence the secrets of the days and the nights.</p>
		<p>But your ears thirst for the sound of your heart’s knowledge.</p>
		<p>You would know in words that which you have always known in thought.</p>
		<p>You would touch with your fingers the naked body of your dreams.</p>
		<p>And it is well you should.</p> 
		<p>The hidden well-spring of your soul must needs rise and run murmuring to the sea;</p>
		<p>And the treasure of your infinite depths would be revealed to your eyes.</p>
		<p>But let there be no scales to weigh your unknown treasure;</p>
		<p>And seek not the depths of your knowledge with staff or sounding line.</p>
		<p>For self is a sea boundless and measureless.</p>
		<p>Say not, “I have found the truth,” but rather, “I have found a truth” .</p>
		<p>Say not, “I have found the path of the soul.” Say rather,</p>
		<p>“I have met the soul walking upon my path.” For the soul walks upon all paths.</p>
		<p>The soul walks not upon a line, neither does it grow like a reed.</p> 
		<p>The soul unfolds itself, like a lotus of countless petals.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
	</section>
</body>
</html>
