<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Prophet</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-020">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Talking</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">A</span>nd then a scholar said, Speak of Talking.</p>
		<p>And he answered, saying:</p>
		<p>You talk when you cease to be at peace with your thoughts;</p>
		<p>And when you can no longer dwell in the solitude of your heart you live in your lips, and sound is a diversion and a pastime.</p>
		<p>And in much of your talking, thinking is half murdered. For thought is a bird of space, that in a cage of words may indeed unfold its wings but cannot fly.</p>
		<p>There are those among you who seek the talkative through fear of being alone.</p>
		<p>The silence of aloneness reveals to their eyes their naked selves and they would escape.</p>
		<p>And there are those who talk, and without knowledge or forethought reveal a truth which they themselves do not understand.</p>
		<p>And there are those who have the truth within them, but they tell it not in words.</p>
		<p>In the bosom of such as these the spirit dwells in rhythmic silence.</p>
		<p>When you meet your friend on the roadside or in the market-place, let the spirit in you move your lips and direct your tongue.</p>
		<p>Let the voice within your voice speak to the ear of his ear;</p>
		<p>For his soul will keep the truth of your heart as the taste of the wine is remembered.</p>
		<p>When the colour is forgotten and the vessel is no more.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
	</section>
</body>
</html>
