<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>Prism Books</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body>
<h3>Sydney Srinivas </h3>
<p>(With an introduction to the Mathematics of Ramanujan by Michael D. Hirschhorn)</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">Prism Books Pvt. Ltd</span>
<SPAN class="en">. </span>
<SPAN class="en">Bengaluru </span>
<SPAN class="en">. </span>
<SPAN class="en">Chennai </span>
<SPAN class="en">. </span>
<SPAN class="en">Hyderabad </span>
<SPAN class="en">. </span>
<SPAN class="en">Kochi </span>
<SPAN class="en">. </span>
<SPAN class="en">Kolkat</span>
<SPAN class="en">a </span>
</p>
<p>Chp-Preface.pmd 1 3/5/2013, 4:54 PM</p>
<p>by Sydney Srinivas</p>
<h5>Publishedby : PrismBooksPvt.Ltd. </h5>
<p># 1865, 32<span><sup>nd </Sup></span>Cross, 10<span><Sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-">th <\/a><\/sup></span>Main, BSK II Stage Bengaluru -560 070. Phone: 080-26714108 Telefax : 080-26713979, e-mail : info@prismbooks.com</p>
<p>Also at</p>
<p>Chennai : Tel: 044-24311244, e-mail: prismchennai@prismbooks.com Hyderabad : Tel: 040-23261828, e-mail: prismhyderabad@prismbooks.com Kochi : Tel: 0484-4000945, e-mail: prismkochi@prismbooks.com Kolkata : Tel: 033-24297957, e-mail: prismkolkata@prismbooks.com</p>
<h5>© Prism Books Pvt. Ltd., 2012 </h5>
<p>Pages : 176</p>
<p>Price : ` 175</p>
<p>Printed on : 80 gsm Maplitho</p>
<p>DTP : Smt. Ahalya</p>
<p>No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. ISBN : 978-81-7286-758-4</p>
<p>Printed at : Aditya Printers, Bengaluru</p>
<p><span>Chp-Preface.pmd 2 3/5/2013, 4:54 PM Chp-Preface.pmd 3 3/5/2013, 4:54 PM </span>Chp-Preface.pmd 4 3/5/2013, 4:54 PM</p>
<h2>
<em>Preface </em>
</h2>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">My interest in Srinivasa Ramanujan deepened when my colleague Steven Armfield asked me whether the great man died due to lead poisoning because he used worn out utensils in Cambridge. Steve was driven by the novel – </span>
<SPAN class="en">Indian Clerk </span>
<SPAN class="en">by David Leavitt. This influenced me to read this work and the masterpiece by Robert Kanigel – </span>
<SPAN class="en">The Man Who Knew Infinity</span>
<SPAN class="en">. While I admired the shear brilliance of Ramanujan, I pitied his pathetic life. </span>
</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">Considered a failure at the university he had the courage to pursue his passion and work on his theorems on the pial of his home in Kumbakonam. Utter poverty, penury did not come in his way. Recognition to his work came not from within India but from Cambridge. He became a great star in mathematics and won FRS when he was only 30. His health was always a problem, and this led to his untimely death when he was only 32. </span>
</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">His is a story that compels researchers to dig more and writers to write more. I at once felt his story of agony and ecstasy should be made known to a wider audience. A request to write a small book on him came from Sri Ramyavaran in Sydney. I did write the book which was very well received by many in Australia, India, USA and Europe. Following this I also wrote a short book in Kannada published by Vasantha Prakashana, Bangalore. Now encouraged by Sri Pranesh of Prism Book house, now I have embarked on writing a somewhat extended biography of Ramanujan. </span>
</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">It has become a pilgrimage for me to visit Kumbakonam where I have seen the house where he lived. I am still amused by the cot in the front room under which he sat, as a young boy, sometimes to work out some of the problems. I have visited </span>
</p>
<p>Chp-Preface.pmd 5 3/5/2013, 4:54 PM</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">the Town School where he studied and was treated very hospitably by its staff and students. It has been a pleasure to visit the Ramanujan Museum in Chaennai and also to meet Sri Viswanathan (grandson of Narayana Ayyar, a mentor of Ramanujan). Alas, the house where he lived in Chennai and continued his work has now been demolished. I could gather variety of information from Sri Narayan, the adopted son of Janaki Ammal and his children and grandchildren. There is really a book worth of information on that great woman. Namakkal which has the Namagiri temple also treated me very well. My pilgrimage continued even at Cambridge where I have visited the Trinity College a number of times and admired the Great Hall from outside. My visits have strengthened my desire and resolve to write on Srinivasa Ramanujan who is an example to all the young people in the world. He is a symbol of the saying – patience and perseverance can overcome the mountains. </span>
</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">One of the special features of this book is that Michel D Hirschhorn has gratefully provided a chapter where he discusses some of the mathematical problems the great master has tackled. He is one of the significant Ramanujan scholars in the world. I am sure it will inspire the reader to attempt to know more about what Ramanujan did and achieved. </span>
</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">Dear Reader, this book is in your hands. My task is fulfilled if you too admire the great genius Ramanujan is and pity the tragic life he led. </span>
</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">Sydney Srinivas </span>
</p>
<p>Chp-Preface.pmd 6 3/5/2013, 4:54 PM</p>
</body>
</html>
