<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>Prism Books</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<h3>Sydney Srinivas</h3>
<p>(With an introduction to the Mathematics of Ramanujan by Michael D. Hirschhorn)</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<h2>Prism Books Pvt. Ltd.</h2>
<p>Bengaluru . Chennai . Hyderabrgffdad . Kochi .</p>
<p>Kolkata</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>by Sydney Srinivas</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Publishedby : Prism Books Pvt. Ltd.</p>
<p># 1865, 32nd Cross, 10th Main, BSK II Stage Bengaluru -560 070. Phone: 080-26714108</p>
<p>
<a>Telefax : 080-26713979, e-mail : </a>
<a>info@prismbooks.com</a>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Also at</p>
<p>Chennai <a>: Tel: 044-24311244, e-mail: </a>prismchennai@prismbooks.com Hyderabad <a>: Tel: 040-23261828, e-mail: </a>prismhyderabad@prismbooks.com Kochi <a>: Tel: 0484-4000945, e-mail: </a>prismkochi@prismbooks.com Kolkata <a>: Tel: 033-24297957, e-mail: </a><a>prismkolkata@prismbooks.com</a></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>© Prism Books Pvt. Ltd., 2012</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Pages : 176</p>
<p>Price : ` 175</p>
<p>Printed on : 80 gsm Maplitho DTP : Smt. Ahalya</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>ISBN : 978-81-7286-758-4</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Printed at : Aditya Printers, Bengaluru</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Preface</p>
<p>My interest in Srinivasa Ramanujan deepened when my colleague Steven Armfield asked me whether the great man died due to lead poisoning because he used worn out utensils in Cambridge. Steve was driven by the novel – <i>Indian Clerk </i>by David Leavitt. This influenced me to read this work and the masterpiece by Robert Kanigel – <i>The Man Who Knew Infinity</i>. While I admired the shear brilliance of Ramanujan, I pitied his pathetic life.</p>
<p>Considered a failure at the university he had the courage to pursue his passion and work on his theorems on the pial of his home in Kumbakonam. Utter poverty, penury did not come in his way. Recognition to his work came not from within India but from Cambridge. He became a great star in mathematics and won FRS when he was only 30. His health was always a problem, and this led to his untimely death when he was only 32.</p>
<p>His is a story that compels researchers to dig more and writers to write more. I at once felt his story of agony and ecstasy should be made known to a wider audience. A request to write a small book on him came from Sri Ramyavaran in Sydney. I did write the book which was very well received by many in Australia, India, USA and Europe. Following this I also wrote a short book in Kannada published by Vasantha Prakashana, Bangalore. Now encouraged by Sri Pranesh of Prism Book house, now I have embarked on writing a somewhat extended biography of Ramanujan.</p>
<p>It has become a pilgrimage for me to visit Kumbakonam where I have seen the house where he lived. I am still amused by the cot in the front room under which he sat, as a young boy, sometimes to work out some of the problems. I have visited</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>the Town School where he studied and was treated very hospitably by its staff and students. It has been a pleasure to visit the Ramanujan Museum in Chaennai and also to meet Sri Viswanathan (grandson of Narayana Ayyar, a mentor of Ramanujan). Alas, the house where he lived in Chennai and continued his work has now been demolished. I could gather variety of information from Sri Narayan, the adopted son of Janaki Ammal and his children and grandchildren. There is really a book worth of information on that great woman. Namakkal which has the Namagiri temple also treated me very well. My pilgrimage continued even at Cambridge where I have visited the Trinity College a number of times and admired the Great Hall from outside. My visits have strengthened my desire and resolve to write on Srinivasa Ramanujan who is an example to all the young people in the world. He is a symbol of the saying – patience and perseverance can overcome the mountains.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>One of the special features of this book is that Michel D Hirschhorn has gratefully provided a chapter where he discusses some of the mathematical problems the great master has tackled. He is one of the significant<u> </u>Ramanujan scholars in the world. I am sure it will inspire the reader to attempt to know more about what Ramanujan did and achieved.</p>
<p>Dear Reader, this book is in your hands. My task is fulfilled if you too admire the great genius Ramanujan is and pity the tragic life he led.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<h4>Sydney Srinivas</h4>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Foreword</p>
<p>The extraordinary life and talent of Srinivasa Ramanujan is a story worth telling, and although previous books exist on the subject, Sydney Srinivas brings a new and very personal slant to this remarkable journey from poor clerk to Cambridge don and one of the leading mathematicians of all time. Sydney Srinivas conducted his own research, in India and England, to build a picture of Ramanujan’s life, and his fascination with this story is quite evident in his enthusiastic and informative writing. As well as being an entertaining read, the story is a lesson in the rewards and dangers of the combination of a great ability and lack of worldliness. Although Ramanujan’s early demise was a tragedy, he did reach his goals, his work is still influencing mathematics, and will do so for many centuries to come. For the rest of us it is only stories such as this that will give insight into the minds of such great geniuses.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<h4>Steven Armfield</h4>
<p>Professor and Head of School School of Aerospace, Mechanical and Mechatronic Engineering University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Acknowledgements</p>
<p>My sincere thanks are due to</p>
<p>Michael D. Hirschhorn for having provided an introduction to Ramanujan’s mathematics which is far above the reach of a common man. I greatly appreciate his friendly gesture.</p>
<p>I sincerely thank Prof. Bruce Berndt, Department of Mathematics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA, for pointing out certain mistakes and errors in the manuscript. I am indebted to him for making the manuscript more “accurate”. Sri. Viswanathan (grandson of Narayana Iyer) who has encouraged me by providing important and interesting material about Ramanujan. He has been kind enough to forward me any newspaper article he comes across, anything he learns from Prof. Bruce Berndt or Prof. Robert Kanigel. He has given me many details of the relationship between Ramanujan and Narayana</p>
<p>Iyer.</p>
<p>Prof. S W Armfield (University of Sydney), who kindled my interest in Ramanujan,</p>
<p>The late Dr. Shankar Sangameswar who gifted my son with a copy of Robert Kanigel’s masterpiece <i>“The Man who knew Infinity” </i>which has become a source for all the later books on Ramanujan,</p>
<p>Sri. Narayanan (adopted son of Janaki Ammal) and his family, Smt. Meena Suresh (Director, Ramanujan Museum, Chennai) for giving me much valuable information.</p>
<p>Dr. C. V. Madhusudana and Dr. Saro Srinivasan for reviewing the manuscript.</p>
<p>Sri. S. Pranesh Siravara of Prism Books Pvt. Ltd. for encouraging me to write the book and taking care of its production and publishing.</p>
<h4>Sydney Srinivas</h4>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<table>
<tr>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Table of</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Contents</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Part</p>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1 - Ramanujan</p>
<p>Who is Ramanujan?</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>3</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>School Days</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>9</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>College Days</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>24</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Notebooks of Ramanujan</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>33</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Marriage and Unemployment</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>39</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Career gathers momentum</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>50</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Cambridge</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>70</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Health Deteriorates</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>93</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Back in India</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>101</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Publishing Notebooks</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>108</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Lost Notebook of Ramanujan</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>110</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>The legacy lives on</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>112</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Part 2 – Mathematics of Ramanujan</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Introduction 119</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The taxicab number 119</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Partition numbers 126</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Ramanujan’s solution to the “house-number” problem 136</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>A continued fraction 140</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>An arithmetic fact 145</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Appendix</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Contributions of Ramanujan</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Passport details of Ramanujan</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Milestones in Ramanujan’s Life</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Further Reading</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Ramanujan’s First Letter to Hardy</p>
</li>
</ol>
</li>
</ol>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Part 1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<h1>Ramanujan</h1>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Who is Ramanujan?</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>About 100 years ago. It is Kumbakonam, a town in the south Indian state of Tamilnadu. It boasts of many temples and shrines and deserves to be called a Temple Town. The Sarangapani temple is a well-known landmark here. Originating from the temple is the Sarangapani Sannidhi Road. Barely hundred feet from the temple, along this road is an unassuming little house. On the pial (a raised floor of the verandah), in front of the house, sits a young man about twenty years of age. He is plump, wears a white cotton vaishti (south Indian male garment) and sports a kudumi (tuft) in his head and a naamam (Vaishnavite religious mark) on his forehead.</p>
<p>He holds a slate on his lap and a chalk in his right hand. He is busy writing on the slate, almost ceaselessly and with a frenetic pace. When he discovers a mistake, he promptly erases his jottings with his left elbow and starts over.</p>
<p>The street noise does not deter him, nor does he care for the strange sounds that the passing cattle make. Vendors on the street loudly peddle their ware. His friends and other boys of his age are busy with their studies in colleges or some other activity. Smaller children are playing on the street, perhaps marbles, gilli or even football; maybe a tournament with bambaram (spinning top) is in progress. The pilgrims en route to the Sarangapani temple, no doubt wonder if this young man isn&#39;t peculiar. They are after the holy</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>4 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Darshan of the almighty and fail to stop and acknowledge the marvel that takes place right in front of them.</p>
<p>Preoccupied with his slate, the young man does not even lift his head! What happens around him mean nothing to him! All of a sudden there is a glow in his eyes and he smiles. Immediately, he takes the notebook he has beside him and transfers something from the slate on to it.</p>
<p>When he feels tired or is in need of a break, he walks to the temple and sits still at a lonely corner. His thinking continues; he is totally absorbed in some deep thought. All of a sudden, realisation dawns that what he has written down is incorrect or there is nothing new in it. Then he walks back home, rips off the sheets from the notebook and hides them in the roof. No one, including himself should ever see it again! Now back to the slate and the chalk. This predictable routine continues not for a day or two, but for five long years.</p>
<p>The eccentric young man was none other than the autodidact Srinivasa Ramanujan Iyengar known as just Ramanujan- probably the greatest mathematician that India has given the world and among the greatest that the world has seen. While only 13, he could express sine and cosine of angles as something different from ratios of sides of a right-angled triangle that we are used to. He could discover a formula for  so that it could be calculated as accurately as desired; a modification of his formula has been used by Alexander J Yee and Shigeru Kondo in 2011 to compute its value, correct to the ten trillion places after the decimal point!</p>
<p>On the pial of the house, he has been breaking new grounds in mathematics and attempting to solve some of the difficult problems that the leading mathematicians of the day could not. Such problems proved intellectually very challenging. Amidst all the din and</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Who is Ramanujan? // 5</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>commotion of everyday existence, the unstoppable genius was making a solid contribution to the realm of pure mathematics in diverse areas</p>
<p>- Partition Numbers, Continued Fractions, Definition of , Prime</p>
<p>Numbers, Mock Theta functions, q-Series, Bernoulli Number and many such.</p>
<p>Surprisingly enough, whatever he jotted down on the verandah of his house and his later work are preserved today as The Notebooks of Ramanujan. These books are to be found in many of the university libraries around the world. These are the rich treasures in mathematics and house about 3254 theorems developed by the great master.</p>
<p>We will see later that over a span of less than two decades, he achieved what ordinary mathematicians could not within a lifetime, becoming a luminary before his untimely death when he was merely</p>
<p>32. This has been the fate of a few of the extra-ordinary people we have come across. Shankaracharya was 32 when he died while Swami Vivekananda was 39. The great composer Mozart died when he was only 34. Perhaps their passion consumes their mortal coil.</p>
<p>Despite having no formal qualifications to his credit, Srinivasa Ramanujan went on to become one of the greatest mathematicians that ever lived. Although he lived more than a hundred years ago, his legacy continues even today. In 2012, there are several mathematicians worldwide, who are still active in pursuing the concepts Ramanujan conceived long ago. Prof. Berndt at the University of Illinois, Michael D Hirschhorn at the University of New South Wales in Australia (who has contributed part 2 of this book) and Prof. Watson from Birmingham University are among the many that have worked extensively on Ramanujan&#39;s theorems and published numerous papers. We also have a "The Ramanujan Journal" devoted to the areas of mathematics influenced by Ramanujan and edited by Prof. Alladi Krishnaswamy of the University of Florida.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>6 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>His work, it appears, lit many a flame and provided perennial ground of research for years to come.</p>
<p>It is often stated "Einstein is to Physics, Mozart is to Music and Ramanujan is to Mathematics". Ramanujan is known wherever pure mathematics is known. He rightly deserves a place in the galaxy of Indian legends like Rabindranath Tagore, C.V. Raman, Mahatma Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru. It is he who brought credit not only to his homeland, but also to the field of mathematics itself. India and Indians ought to be proud of him. Of course, there is some revival of interest in him as expressed in the recent celebration of his 125th birth anniversary in India.</p>
<p>Sometimes a question is asked - Does Ramanujan belong to the class of Ancient Indian mathematicians such as Aryabhata, Bhaskara and others? Or does he belong to the School of Modern mathematicians? He definitely belongs to the modern school of international mathematicians. His legacy continues to date.</p>
<p>The reason why some include him the class of ancient mathematicians can be this. Ramanujan came from a family with deep religious beliefs and practices as was common in those days. Metaphysics was built into him. He many times tried to interpret mathematics through his metaphysical beliefs. For example he had his own "Theory of Reality" and a curious and entertaining explanation for the term 2n–1. This alone will not team him with the ancient Indian or the Vedic mathematicians.</p>
<p>Ramanujan&#39;s mind seems to be a calculator of astonishing speed. He would come up with solutions to complex riddles almost instantaneously. This has led a few to brand him as a "Hindu Calculator". People have pointed out that his parents had no knowledge of mathematics whatsoever. Where did his genius come from? Some of the commentators have attributed it to Poorava Janma</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Who is Ramanujan? // 7</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>vaasana meaning that it has been carried forward from his previous life where he should have been a great mathematician. Let the debate continue. It should be pointed out that quick bursting out of answer or flashes of inspiration he had is only a small fraction of his personality. In reality he is a master who evolved expressions for Partition Functions, Continued Fractions and other complicated issues in mathematics. Here again it is said that there was more inspiration and flash when he did these than the struggle with pen and paper. It is this intuition that characterises Ramanujan; in the absence of it he would have been an ordinary mathematician, it looks like.</p>
<p>No doubt he found ecstatic heights when he dwelt in mathematics along with the endless theorems and results. But what was his non-mathematical life like? Born into a lower middle class family, always struggling to make both ends meet, being without a job when he was breaking new grounds in mathematics, plagued by poor health, homesick and lonely in England; it was no doubt, a life full of agony. Ramanujan&#39;s cup of woes was ever brimming. Unmindful of his circumstances, however he ploughed on tirelessly, finding solace in numbers. When combined with mathematics, it became a life of agony and ecstasy.</p>
<p>"The story of mathematician genius Srinivasa Ramanujan is a story of human triumph and an example of what genius can accomplish against the odds" said Robert Kanigel (who has written an authoritative biography of Ramanujan) during his 125th birth anniversary celebrations in Chennai.</p>
<p>Such a life though, is not uncommon among many innovators, scientists, artists and thinkers. Many faced abject poverty, surviving on handouts by philanthropic individuals as they struggled for recognition, desperately hoping for professional breakthrough. Many others have suffered emotionally, if not physically. They have suffered,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>8 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>but kept the suffering to themselves. What we obtain from them is only the fruits of their action, which is their contribution to mankind. Ramanujan, Baudelaire, T. S. Eliot, Marie Curie and many others bear testimony to this fact.</p>
<p>In his celebrated poem "A Psalm of Life" the American poet</p>
<p>H. W. Longfellow has said: "Lives of great men all remind us; we can make our life sublime". Indeed, there can be no better example than that of Ramanujan. His was a totally devoted and dedicated existence; Mathematics, was an all consuming passion, which he never gave up, even under very hostile circumstances and amid sheer doom and gloom. Of course, his efforts paid off. But, with success came the untimely death; something which people feel could have been prevented. It is that chequered life we are tracing in this book. Of course, one cannot do full justice to his greatness in a book of this size. Yet, this is homage to the great soul.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>// 9</p>
<p>School Days</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>If zero bananas are divided among zero children</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The third form class (Year 8) at the Town High school in Kumbakonam was in full swing. It was a lesson in mathematics. The teacher said: "Any number divided by itself gives 1. Say, one has four bananas and divides them among four children, then they get one banana each." It was such an obvious truth that no student paid any attention. They were very much used to this law. But there was one student in their midst who thought far ahead of others. Something bothered him; something irritated him. That student was Ramanujan. He shot a question at the teacher -, "Anything divided by itself is one; I agree. How about zero divided by zero? If I divide zero bananas among zero children, will each child get a banana?" Was it an innocent question? Was it an attempt to tease, quiz or challenge the teacher? Probably it was the latter. Surely, the teacher was stumped, particularly as it came from someone so young.</p>
<p>Zero divided by zero, 0/0, is an indeterminate form in mathematics. It occurs sometimes in scientific and engineering calculations. L’Hôpital’s rule or other methods are used to manipulate the expression so that a limit can be evaluated.</p>
<p>It is, however, not surprising that a prodigy like Ramanujan came up with this question when he was only thirteen years old. Many great scientists have pondered over difficult issues when they were</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>10 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>quite young. Newton wondered why an apple that has fallen off a tree did not go back to it. He may have been a bit older than Ramanujan when he grappled with gravitational force. Einstein is said to have asked, "What will the world look like when I ride a beam of light?" That formed a basis for his later Theory of Relativity. It seems common that outstanding scientists and thinkers have asked disturbing questions when they were young.</p>
<p>Kumbakonam</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Where is this town - Kumbakonam? What is it known for? What is its history? These questions naturally arise when we begin to study the life of Ramanujan. It is a town in the Tanjavur district of Tamilnadu and is situated about 40 kms from Tanjavur, about</p>
<p>90 kms from Tiruchirapalli (Trichy) and 273 kms from Chennai, the capital of the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu. The state was called Madras till recently. The famous River Cauveri flows at the north of the town and one of its tributaries, Arasalar River flows on the south. The town has been ruled by a variety of dynasties - Pallava, Chola and the Nayak and rose to prominence somewhere between 7th and 9th centuries AD. The town had a population of about 50,000 during 1880. Today it has risen to 150,000 comprising of mostly Tamil speaking people. The place is tropical with very mild or no winter. Agriculture is the main occupation of the inhabitants, rice being the main crop grown. With a deep history of its own the Kumbakonam is known for the temples it houses. Within its municipality there are 188 of them. The Sarangapani Temple, the Kumbeswara Temple and the Rangaswamy temple are the most important ones. Even today it is a place for pilgrims. Numerous festivities take place in its temples attracting thousands of people all the year round. Mahamaham festival is the chief among them. Sri Raghavendra Swamy, the exponent of Dvaitha philosophy was the head of the Mutt here from 1624 to 1636.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>School Days // 11</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Narrow mud roads, small houses with a low ceiling marked the town. A two tier pial in front of these houses characterized them. There were hardly any vehicles on the streets barring bullock carts. People preferred to walk. The rich ones however could afford a bullock cart. Otherwise the streets were occupied by cattle, stray dogs and children running around and playing. These features are however common to any town of that size in India those days.</p>
<p>Most people who lived in Kumbakonam were of the hard working class. These could not read or write. Then there were the Brahmins who were generally literate. These read scriptures as well. They took part in religious duties in the temples and performed birth ceremonies, weddings and funerals. In addition Brahmins were a great help to rich shop owners and other merchants in maintaining their account and the books. There were many in this class who received formal education in schools and colleges. These easily became teachers, lecturers and also held positions in government. The town had sheltered all the three classes of Brahmins - Iyengars (of the Visishta</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 1: Sarangapani Street in Kumbakonam today</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>12 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Adviatha School), Iyers (of the Advaitha School) and the Madhwas (of the Dvaitha School). They observed the religious practices of their class very rigorously. Each school tried to preserve their identity and outdo the others; there was hardly any marriage between people of different schools.</p>
<p>Birth of Ramanujan</p>
<p>Kuppuswamy Srinivasa Iyengar and his wife Komalatammal were among the Brahmin couples of the Iyengar School that lived in</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 2: Sarangapani Temple</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Kumbakonam. The two were very orthodox in their habits. As was common, Srinivasa Iyengar had neither wealth nor connections of importance. In addition he lacked education that could make him employable in some office or school. Struggle to make a living was</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 3: Ramanujan’s house in 1890</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>School Days // 13</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 4: Ramanujan’s house today</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>obvious. He worked as a clerk in a shop that sold silk saris and earned a modest income of about twenty rupees a month. Komalathammal supplemented this income by singing Bhajans in temples. This may have fetched her five or ten rupees a month. Obviously, it was difficult to make both ends meet. The couple lived very close to the The Sarangapani Temple. Built in the 15th century it is a twelve story high building, about 50meters high. It is on the shores of River Cauveri and has been revered by the Alwars or the Tamil Vaishnavite saint poets.</p>
<p>It was the late 19th century; India was a part of the British Empire. Interestingly, it was the period when Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime Minister of India was born; and Mahatma Gandhi and the poet Rabindranath Tagore were young adults. It was then that Ramanujan was born to this couple on December 22, 1887 in Erode, a small textile town about 400 kms away from Chennai. It happened to be the parent&#39;s place for Komalathammal where she had been for the delivery of the baby.</p>
<p>The couple had six children, three of whom died in infancy. These included Sadagopan who died when Ramanujan was a year and</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>14 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>a half, then a girl born in 1891 and a boy Seshan in 1893. Only Ramanujan, his brothers Lakshmi Narasimhan (ten years younger) and Tirunarayanan (seventeen years younger) survived. Those were the days when the infant mortality rate was high.</p>
<p>Work kept Srinivasa Iyengar away from home for most part of the day. He had to carry out all the work associated with the sari shop- to wait on the customers, take orders, maintain accounts and collect bills when necessary. It used to be late night when he returned home. Thus he could play only a minimal role in the family&#39;s upbringing and values. There does not seem to be any great affection between him and the children, the relationship being a rather formal one. In fact, it appears that he was an unwelcome visitor to his house. As a result, the responsibility of children&#39;s education and welfare fell entirely on mother&#39;s shoulders. This again is not an unusual feature of the middle class or the lower class Indian families of those times.</p>
<p>Ramanujan hardly enjoyed good health. As a toddler, he fell seriously ill with smallpox. Those were the days when smallpox and cholera used to kill many children, sometimes in thousands. Mathematics was fortunate in that Ramanujan was saved. However, he had itching and boils. These may have contributed in some measure to mould his character. Ramanujan turned out to be stubborn, sensitive and almost eccentric. These qualities, as we will see later, determined his personality; however, he used them in a constructive manner to achieve something positive. So stubborn was he, as a child that he would roll in mud and throw a tantrum, when he did not get what he wanted. It is also said that he often only ate at the local temple where he found peace he wanted. Perhaps these qualities made him strongly determined and focused on his goals. We find that he did not give up mathematics even when he seemed to get nothing out of it. Smallpox did leave its physical mark on Ramanujan; he had scars on his face.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>School Days // 15</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Ramanujan&#39;s family in the meantime was beset with one worry after the other. He was already three; he showed no signs of talking. "Will he talk at all?" the parents wondered. His mother took him to Kanchipuram, another iconic temple town near Chennai, where her parents now lived. The outlook brightened and the young boy did pick up speech. To start with he learnt his mother tongue, Tamil and its alphabets. He was enrolled in Thinnai Palli Koodam, a local school. It was a typical village school where the teacher (usually paid in kind by the villagers) taught five or six students on the pial of his house. Children learnt alphabets, mathematical tables and maybe some prayers in such a school. There was no prescribed textbook as such. Usually the children learnt alphabets by tracing them in sand or rice. Strict discipline was enforced. Every mistake led to punishment. Naturally, the students would be scared of the teacher.</p>
<p>Many great scholars have been total misfits in the formal education system, more so with the village school system that Ramanujan attended. He was no exception. He disliked the school; he disliked the teacher. This continued even later when he was admitted to a formal school. A loner and a rebel, he was always in trouble for truant behaviour; his punishment - sitting in a corner with arms folded. Of course, he hated it; Often, he would simply stomp out of the classroom.</p>
<p>He was a gifted child; he wanted to be independent and do things on his own. His curiosity and spirit of enquiry, it appears may have blossomed at this tender age itself. He used to ask questions such as "Who is the first man on this earth? What is the distance between clouds?" Posing such precocious questions seems to be a characteristic of great scientists and thinkers. That is what distinguishes them. Only such people have made breakthroughs in science.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>16 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Unlike children of his age, Ramanujan had little interest in sports. In addition, he was fat and often joked, "If I fall on anybody, they will be crushed". It is also said that his mother did not allow him to go out and mix with other children. For her, Ramanujan was special; he was much above other children around. The solution he found - he would sit on a cot near the window of the front room of his house at Kumbakonam and talk to the people passing by. This house and the window as well as the cot have been preserved even today. Some of his childhood friends have found him working mathematics sitting under this cot; He wanted his parents not to see what he was doing. That building is very representative of that age. A corridor to the right runs from the front to the backyard. To the left along it are a room, the hall, the kitchen and a bath room. There is a customary well in the backyard.</p>
<p>Komalatammal</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Ramanujan&#39;s grandfather (Komalathammal&#39;s father) lost his job.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 5: Window and Cot in the house at Kumabakonam</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>School Days // 17</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>This forced the family move back to Kumbakonam. His schooling continued there at the Kangayan Primary School. A loner, he enjoyed his mother&#39;s company than the school. She took special care of him and affectionately called him Chinnasamy (little God). The two spent many hours playing board games like Tiger and Goat or the very popular Snakes and Ladders. Komalatammal was a shrewd and cultured lady. She was always ready to exert her authority and intervene on her son&#39;s behalf. Extremely possessive, her love for Ramanujan was intense, almost bordering on obsession; and in many ways, it shaped his destiny, perhaps to his detriment, as the later chapters will show. It was an absolute control!</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 6: Mother Komalathammal</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 7: Brother, Thirunarayanan</p>
<p>His mother fed him very well. His meal consisted of rice, rasam, yoghurt and pickles, served on a banana leaf, as was the prevailing custom back then. To prepare him for school, she bathed him, combed his hair, tied his vaishti, decorated his forehead with a naamam and at times, tucked a flower in his hair. These simple everyday chores strengthened the mother-son bonding.</p>
<p>Many mothers have been a towering influence in the lives of successful individuals; Komalatammal was definitely one such. She took on the crucial responsibility of instilling good values and shaping</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>18 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>her son to be a worthy individual. To this end, Komalatammal groomed Ramanujan in all the traditional ideals and beliefs of a devout Hindu Iyengar. This she did by introducing him to religious stories and hymns. She narrated episodes from Hindu epics Ramayana and Mahabharata every evening. She also included tales of the family deity, Namagiri Thaayaar of Namakkal. Goddess Namagiri, the consort of God Narasimha (half man-half lion avatar of Vishnu) has played a very significant and dominant role in the development of Ramanujan. Bhakti (devotion to God) is an all-important attribute that he picked up from his mother. Ramanujan, we will see later, became a composite individual - of mathematics and metaphysics, co-existing harmoniously. He became a typical Iyengar boy; he used to touch his mother&#39;s feet before he left for school every day to invoke her blessings. This was one of the practices and, still remains in many families, to show respect to the elders.</p>
<p>Clearly Komalathammal had great expectations of her son. She, it seems, was aware of his potential and capability. She wanted to make him educated, maybe to be a graduate or a post graduate, and become a teacher or a lecturer in a college or enter public service in the government. It seems she saw him as one who could uplift the economic and social status of the family. She had clearly ruled out Ramanujan from working as a book keeper in a shop. To achieve her goal, she did everything that was possible. She trained him, encouraged him, and met the principals of colleges urging them to admit him back after his failures. Following Ramanujan&#39;s death she even wrote to Hardy of Cambridge.</p>
<p>At the primary school he learnt English, which was very much a part of the curriculum in British India. In addition, Ramanaujan studied Tamil, arithmetic and geography. In 1897, he outperformed his peers and stood first in the entire district of Tanjavur, to which Kumbakonam belonged.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>School Days // 19</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Town High school</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 8: Town High school, Kumbakonam</p>
<p>As a reward for his exemplary performance, Ramanujan was granted part scholarship at the famous Town High School in Kumbakonam. This school building is located only five minutes away from his house on Sarangapani Street. It remains the same even today. A bust of Ramanujan stands proudly at its centre. A classroom has been named after him as well.</p>
<p>The medium of instruction at Town High School was English. Discipline was strictly enforced among staff and students. The headmaster, Krishnaswamy Iyer would often march through the building with a walking stick in one hand and knocking everywhere. This would alert teachers and students of his coming. His inspection of the class took the form of interrogating staff and students.</p>
<p>It was here that Ramanujan first gained recognition as a maths whiz and his genius started to blossom. While in second form (Year 7) his friends would come to him for help with mathematics.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>20 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 9: Room named after Ramanujan in Town High school</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>By the time he was in third form, he had mastered algebra and geometry all by himself. In fact, he had begun to challenge his teachers. The interesting anecdote about zero divided by zero is one such.</p>
<p>To supplement the family&#39;s modest income, Komalatammal used to accommodate boarders in her house. They were usually students from the university who were served meals in return for a small monthly payment. One such boarder appreciated Ramanujan&#39;s interest in mathematics and lent him a textbook by S.L. Loney. An authority on Plane Trigonometry, Loney&#39;s book was a must for university students in the late nineteenth and the early twentieth centuries. By the age of thirteen, Ramanujan had mastered it, teaching himself complex concepts in pure mathematics! Boarders also supplied him other books; it is not clear though, how far they influenced him.</p>
<p>He was learning at an astronomical pace. With the help of senior students, he soon deciphered how to solve cubic equations. He was fascinated by the figure , which is an important term in mathematics and is usually taken as the circumference of a circle divided by its diameter. It is well known that approximately it is equal to 22/7,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>School Days // 21</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>which is a recurring fraction. Ramanujan amused himself by calculating as accurately as he could. Later he developed a totally different expression to enable the most accurate calculation of . Another transcendental number e also attracted him.</p>
<p>Likewise Ramanujan independently grappled with complex problems in Trigonometry. One such is as follows. It is usual to express the trigonometric functions such as sine and cosine as ratios of sides of a right-angled triangle. Consider the right-angled triangle ABC. Here sin q</p>
<p>= BC/AC and cos q = AB/AC. Ramanujan went far beyond these definitions and understood them as series expansions.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>A Right Angled Triangle</p>
<p>He might have come across this in the work of another great mathematician of all times - Euler (1707 - 1783).</p>
<p>To a person of this caliber mathematics taught at school must have been a joke. No wonder that Ramanujan finished his mathematics examinations in less than half the time allowed.</p>
<p>Not surprisingly, his teachers too approached him for help. The school had 1200 students and about 36 teachers. There were a few classrooms. Students had to be distributed into classes keeping in mind their individual requirements and the constraints of number of staff members and classrooms. Clashes in timetable and room allocation had to be avoided. This seemed a formidable task for the teachers, but Ramanujan could do it easily!</p>
<p>He entered the fourth form and it was as if he was in the clouds. He was far, far ahead of other students. His friends hardly understood him. In fact, they stood in awe when they saw him. He was already a minor celebrity. He won many prizes including one for mathematics.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>22 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>His teacher openly declared, "He is better than the best. He deserves more than 100%. It is too less for him." In reality, Ramanujan was "off scale". The yardstick used by the school was not adequate for him.</p>
<p>The prizes he won included "Works of Wordsworth", "Works of Tennyson" etc. It is not sure though how much he enjoyed these. He may not have even opened these books! The Ramanujan museum in Chennai houses the certificates and such prizes given to him and many pictures.</p>
<p>It was a usual sight for his neighbours. In the evenings, Ramanujan would sit on the pial of his house surrounded by his classmates. He was helping them with their maths. Children are anyway naughty. They would fill his underwear with small pebbles. He would not even notice that. He was usually far removed from the world around him.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 10: Ramanujan Museum in Chennai</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>School Days // 23</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Still there was a minor disappointment for him. In one of the mathematics examinations at Town High Ramanujan scored 42 out of 45 while his friend, Sarangapani scored 43. This upset and irritated him; it was as if a major catastrophe had happened. He cried and cried; he stopped talking to Sarangapani. His friends tried to console him pointing out that he had scored higher in all other subjects and that his total was still higher than that of Sarangapani. He was not convinced; how could he get more marks than me? Ironically, we will learn later that the same Sarangapani became a lifelong friend and came to Ramanujan&#39;s rescue when his life was in doldrums.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>24 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>College days</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Pursuing his Passion</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Ramanujan had no difficulty whatsoever in getting admission into the university. In fact he was welcomed with a scholarship. In 1904, he enrolled in a two year FA (First Arts, a pre-requisite for a bachelor&#39;s course) course at the Government College in Kumbakonam. The college building was at the end of town; about twenty minutes walk from his house. It was a small college with a teaching staff of</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 11: Government College, Kumbakonam</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>College Days // 25</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>twelve and was also known as Cambridge of South India as its standards were high.</p>
<p>By now he had become a traditional Iyengar Brahmin in dress and behavior. He could easily recite Vedas and Upanishads. He took part in rituals and ceremonies and changed his sacred thread every year as required. He joined others and went on pilgrimage to holy places around. He is said to have once walked to a Thiruvizha (temple fair) at a place six miles away from town. All along the way Ramanujan recited Vedas and stotras and interpreted them as well! It is said that he could interpret dreams and resembled a mystic. One evening he turned up at his teacher&#39;s house and started speaking about zero, infinity, God etc. His small audience was kept spell bound till daybreak.</p>
<p>The historic Saarangapani temple near his house was also close to his heart and now meant a lot to him. He found peace within its walls; he would often spend long hours in it. He would work and fall asleep in the temple. His heart resonated to the various stories behind the sculptures within and around the temple. Maybe this was</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 12: An inside view of Sarangapani Temple</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>26 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>the source of inspiration where he recharged his batteries. His devotion for Goddess Namagiri may have taken a new turn here. She became the muse who in his dreams wrote out the formulae in blood. She was the ultimate inspiration for him. A temple has been built for Goddess Namagiri in the town of Namakkal about 160 kms from Kumbakonam. Ramanujan&#39;s mother was an ardent believer of Namagiri and had vowed to her. The gift she received was Ramanujan! We find that Namagiri plays a very important role in his life. Happiness or grief, she is there with him.</p>
<p>To be or not to be and Magic Square</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The college life seems to be the turning point in Ramanujan&#39;s life. Among the subjects, he had to study were English, History and Physiology. Obsessed as he was with maths, Ramanujan surrendered to his passion and ignored everything else. The sense of balance required of a student was lost. Other subjects meant nothing to him; they were simply not necessary!</p>
<p>The English lecturer taught Hamlet. As he read the passage "To be or not to be" he enacted it with all the passion. He almost lost himself. The students eagerly listened to him and took notes continuously. "How well he teaches!" said they and wondered whether Hamlet really procrastinated. They too were lost to the oratory of the lecturer. But on one of the back benches, Ramanujan had lost himself, not to Hamlet or the lecturer. He was lost to the magic squares. He was busy making them. Look at the big square with nine small squares within it as shown below. Add the numbers horizontally, vertically or diagonally. You get the same answer.</p>
<p>8 1 6</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>3 5 7</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>4 9 2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>College Days // 27</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Ramanujan might have fancied himself making even bigger squares 4  4 for instance. He has even developed formulae to fill numbers in such squares!</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The next lecture was in History. As the lecturer spoke of the rise and fall of the Roman Empire, Ramanujan would be found tackling some important issue relating to prime numbers!</p>
<p>"A Slave of His Genius"</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>While in college, Ramanujan seemed to forget that he was admitted to college on merit and a scholarship was given to him. It was his responsibility to be careful, do well in all the subjects and retain the scholarship. His mother had tried to draw him towards education, career and a good life. But his genius pulled him elsewhere. Do mathematics, mathematics and mathematics.</p>
<p>Two sources, both of which were introduced during his adolescence, fuelled his interest. One was the textbook on trigonometry by Loney, which he had mastered already, the other A Synopsis of Elementary Results in Pure and Applied Mathematics by George Shoobridge Carr. This book is a collection of about 6000 formulae and equations without any proof.</p>
<p>Ramanujan also had access to the Mathematical Gazette of London, which would list several unsolved problems. He would pick them up and attempt a solution. Further, Carr&#39;s book was an inexhaustible mine for him. He would take clues from the formulas and results therein and build upon them. New theorems would emerge. In fact, Carr&#39;s book was not regarded in esteem in elite academic circles. It would have been ignored and forgotten but for Ramanujan; he made the book famous.</p>
<p>The teachers in the college did notice this indifference of Ramanujan towards subjects other than mathematics. One of his</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>28 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>lecturers, Seshu Iyer became aware of this, but gave Ramanujan a free hand. The other one had admired his interest and lent him a book on Calculus. On learning about his lack of interest in other studies the teacher forced him to return the book.</p>
<p>By the end of the year, the inevitable examinations dawned. As can be guessed, the outcome was obvious. Ramanujan failed. Among the subjects he failed was English Composition. Was his English really so bad? He had already drafted his "Notebooks" where he seems to exhibit a good command over English. Was it the lack of interest in anything other than mathematics? There is no answer.</p>
<p>Failure meant the end of scholarship. He could not progress to the next level - senior FA. He had to repeat the first year studies. An irate Komalatammal challenged the principal, "My son is a genius. How can you withdraw his scholarship?" The principal was equally adamant, "It is simple; your son has failed. Rules are rules."</p>
<p>Ironically, the same college has since acknowledged Ramanujan as one of its illustrious alumni, erecting a bust in his honour.</p>
<p>Having to repeat a year without a scholarship however dealt a mortal blow to the family. He now had to pay the college fee which was a princely sum of 32 rupees per term; his father&#39;s six weeks salary! Ramanujan tried to remain and manage in the college on the strength of his mathematical ability. But it seemed impossible. He grew so frustrated that in August 1905, he ran away to the harbour city of Vishakapattanam (in Andhra Pradesh and about 600 kms North of Chennai). Such disappearances seemed to be common to him. His father put an appeal in the famous newspaper The Hindu which is reproduced below.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>College Days // 29</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>His parents did succeed in bringing him back to Kumbakonam.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Could he say &#39;Bye" to the university and take up something else? No, a university degree was vital to secure a good job and lead a respectable life. This was especially true for a person of Ramanujan&#39;s nature, who was not capable of physical work. Further, it would have been a shame to the family if he made a living out of hard physical work or hard labour. In 1906, he managed to get admission into another college, this time in Madras (now known as Chennai). It was at Pachaiyapas College in Kilpauk. He moved to Chennai to be taken care of by his grandmother who lived near the Fruit Bazaar close to where the college was situated. His associates have stated that he lived in a dark, dingy and ill - ventilated house. But that was all his grandmother could afford.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>30 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>He was 18 years of age. He had an excellent mathematics teacher in the new college who happened to see his notebooks. The important theorems and results clearly proved Ramanujan&#39;s genius. The teacher was obviously very impressed and showed them to the principal of the college. Realising the young lad&#39;s potential, a scholarship was immediately offered.</p>
<p>Within no time he established himself in the new college. His instincts and foresight had already developed. This expressed itself both in classroom and outside. His teacher Ramanuja Chariar would take about 12 steps to prove something in mathematics. Ramanujan would do it in 2! Teachers were not ashamed to consult him in the open class. He interrupted the classes with his faster tricks which would leave students and staff totally confused.</p>
<p>Ramanujan now joined hands with another teacher Singaravelu Mudaliar to tackle problems from journals. He brought his lunch from home, which was usually curd rise with pickles. He finished his lunch in a hurry and ran to Mudaliar who would be waiting for the student. Collaboration would continue. If the teacher could not tackle the problem, maybe Ramanujan could. But if he could not, it appeared no one could! No wonder students who were studying for a higher degree such as B.A. came to him for help in mathematics.</p>
<p>His obsession for numbers sadly, came in the way yet again. He would not take interest in any other subject. Physiology seemed horrible. How could he bother about the anatomy of a rabbit? What was the necessity? The teacher would dissect a frog in front of the class to explain its internal organs. A strict vegetarian, Ramanujan could not stand it. He, it seems, was weak in English too but did not worry about it.</p>
<p>"Stout, pale and anemic" health posed new problems for the genius as well. He fell ill repeatedly. He had to leave the college and get back to Kumbakonam, but he studied privately.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>College Days // 31</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Examinations loomed once more. The result was also the same as before. He had failed in physiology. He had come out of the three-hour long examination after only thirty minutes. In fact he had written as his answer to a question, "Sir, this is my undigested part of the Digestion chapter". After repeated interventions, he was given one more chance. He failed again in 1907. This meant that Ramanujan was out of university. One of his friends has remarked that he used to score less than 10 in physiology, about 10 to 20 in Greek and Roman History and about 25 in English. It is interesting that our mathematics wizard scored only 80 out of 150 in maths. This was because he did not like geometry which formed a major portion of the math&#39;s syllabus. So out went geometry from his mind.</p>
<p>During his Pachaiyapas days, he was careless of his physical condition and seemed to be perennially tired. Once at the Egmore train station, he had fallen asleep. Some passer by awakened him, took him to his house, fed him and showed him the way to the college.</p>
<p>His dress also seemed strange. The college had ruled that every student wear a coat and a cap. Ramanujan did conform, but there was no shirt underneath his coat! Maybe he could not afford one. A red Hassan cap was almost an integral part of him. Once, this cap blew away in the wind as he was boarding a tram. He could not attend his lectures without it. His Sanskrit lecturer insisted that he buy a cheap one from the China Bazaar next to the college. But he had no money and sought to be excused, as he was poor.</p>
<p>Ramanujan went back to Kumbakonam. Luckily, his family understood him. No one would tease or victimize him for his failure at the colleges. His neighbours were particularly fond of him. They would feed him at times. Amazed by his brilliance, one of them invited him many times to her house and offered meals and Dosai</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>32 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(crispy Indian pancake). There were other ladies who would help Komalathammal by providing her with the ration (rice, lentils etc) required.</p>
<p>Ramanujan did not want to be a burden on his parents. His father made only a small amount of money; it was imperative that he supplement the family income. But how? Tutoring students was an obvious option. He tried it. One of his students was Viswanatha Shastry who would learn algebra, geometry and trigonometry, paying seven rupees a month. It so happened that Ramanujan could not stick to the syllabus and standard material. He would raise philosophical questions. The height of a wall is relative, it depends upon whether an ant measures it or a buffalo measures it, he would so digress. Such questions interested Ramanujan, but certainly not the student. The tutorship ended. He had another student Govindarajan to learn Differential Calculus. Ramanujan dwelt at length explaining "infinity" and "infinitesimal". These terms should have provided him with an abundant metaphysical material to deal with. But this lasted only two weeks, "His tuition is of no use in the examination." said the student who later on became the chairman of the Planning Commission of India. Here again we observe a lack of common sense on the part of our mathematical genius. Students who approach a teacher for a private tuition are most of the times interested in passing an examination than learning a subject. They do not spend money for philosophical lectures. This tendency prevails even today among students in India and elsewhere.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>// 33</p>
<p>Notebooks of Ramanujan</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>He was without a formal qualification. He was penniless. He had poor parents who had so far managed to support him! One wonders what could have been done under such circumstances. Ramanujan was dauntless. He did not give up mathematics. Here again he remained lonely; there was no one to help him or guide him.</p>
<p>It was a common sight to find Ramanujan sitting on the pial in front of his house with a large slate on his lap. Armed with a large piece of chalk, he would work out his equations and develop theorems. Groundbreaking research that astonished the mathematical world, was taking shape amidst the banal and the ordinary. Of course, his family continued to support him. This lasted not one or two but five years.</p>
<p>During this troubled period, Ramanujan discovered many formulae - in Hypergeometric series, Continued Fractions, Singular Moduli and what not! It appeared that "in proving one formula he discovered many others." He would not waste a precious moment. It was as if he was finally liberated now, free of all the shackles that weighed him down. He did not have to bother about classes, unwanted physiology or history. His intellectual flight knew no bounds. It was a blessing in disguise for mathematics! It also occurred to him that he should preserve his findings for others to see. He</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>34 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>began to write down his results in notebooks. It is said that he used green ink to write. Thus he filled the 200 pages with all strange formulas. There seemed to be some order when he first started filling in these pages. He wrote from left to write. Soon the order vanished, there was chaos. It has been commented that Ramanujan used his own notation and failed to follow the well accepted ones. The reality is that he was not aware of the standard notation at all. The original books have been preserved even to date.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 13: Notebooks of Ramanujan</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The result was the emergence of Notebooks of Ramanujan. There are five of them. These books are iconic to mathematical literature and found in many university libraries all over the world. They have resulted in copious amount of research in pure mathematics and are referred to even ninety years since Ramanujan&#39;s departure. It should be pointed out that he, a drop out of the university system, worked at the highest level of pure mathematics and even the advanced students in universities today find it difficult to follow.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Notebooks of Ramanujan // 35</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Though he worked all by himself, Ramanujan did visit the college to meet the professors to discuss mathematics, or to borrow a book from the Library. One of his friends has described him as "a simple soul that one could never be unfriendly towards him. He had always a contemplative look."</p>
<p>Jobless and penniless, Ramanujan may have been a social failure so far, but his notebooks were proof of his superior intellect and exceptional caliber. Interestingly, history offers other such instances. Newton carried out his landmark research while visiting his mother during the London plague (1665-1666). After all, great science or art does not come in pomp; it does not need a royal setting for its emergence. It comes unaware and unnoticed.</p>
<p>Ramanujan&#39;s notebooks were compiled between 1907 and 1914 when he was in his twenties. The mid twenties seem to be the crucial period for creative work. For science, especially physics and chemistry, "26" appears to be the magic figure. Most of the high achievers did their pioneering work when they were 26. Newton and Einstein are the best examples.</p>
<p>The distinguishing feature of Ramanujan is that he developed his theories under no guidance whatever. Neither did he have a formal training. He did on his own; he was a Swayambhu (self manifested). His methods did not seem to be the accepted western ones. Instinct appears to have played a big role. It is very difficult to verify how far this claim is true, especially now, a hundred years after him.</p>
<p>One of the Notebooks came to light after Ramanujan&#39;s death and is known as Lost Notebooks of Ramanujan. These will be discussed later.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>36 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 14: Ramanujan&#39;s Handwriting</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Mathematics and Metaphysics</p>
<p>Brilliant in mathematics, no doubt, Ramanujan was deep routed in metaphysics and religion. His wife has told that he was acquainted with astrology and could read horoscopes. Many people consulted</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Notebooks of Ramanujan // 37</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>him on these matters. He and his grandmother lived in a part of a big house. Other families lived there as well. Once Ramanujan dreamt that a child living in another part of the house was in danger of death. He checked in the morning and found the child to be doing well. But by evening it developed high fever and it fell unconscious after two days. As a remedy, he suggested to the parents of the child- "Please remove the child to the next house. Death of a child can occur only in a certain space-time". The child was placed in the next house and it survived. However it was brought back to the original place due to some reason; it died. This seems to have haunted Ramanujan very badly that he ran away to a temple. The next day he himself was down with fever which the medicines could not control. He prayed Namagiri who appeared in his dream and suggested a remedy - drink water in which boiled rice has been kept overnight. This done, he recovered. He had such an implicit his faith in Namagiri; He said once that he dreamt that she appeared in his dream and wrote an elliptic integral in blood.</p>
<p>At the slightest pretext he would get into metaphysics. Any mathematical equation could inspire him and launch him in a different sphere. Take for example the expression 2n - 1. One sees nothing special in this; it is an ordinary expression. But Ramanujan was able to see a world of his own within this. When n = 0, it gives 0, which meant shoonya or nothing. When n = 1, the answer is 1. For him it meant unity of God Himself. Then when n = 2, it gives 3, which stood for trimurthis or the three Hindu Gods - Brahma, Vishnu and Maheswara. When n = 3, the answer is 7, symbolizing saptarishis or the seven rishis (sages) which Hindus have heard of. He was also fascinated with the number 7 or saptha. He could associate different meanings to saptarshi, ratha sapthami, saptha dweepa etc.</p>
<p>During his later years, his friends found a piece of paper in his Cambridge room where he had recorded his Theory of Reality. One</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>38 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>of his associates in Cambridge, Mahalanobis also recalls this. This theory is based on concepts of zero, infinity and the set of numbers. According to it, zero meant Nirguna Brahma, hinting a condition to which no qualities can be attributed. Infinity was Saguna Brahma, which included the totality of all attributes; it was inexhaustible. According to him the product of infinity and zero supplied the whole set of finite numbers; each number stood for a characteristic. Each individual was represented by a particular number, which also determined his or her character.</p>
<p>All these could be dismissed as mere fantasy or wild imagination. But for Ramanujan it seemed very real. He thought that he was revealing a great secret through mathematics. For him it was not just a relationship between numbers. "An equation to me has no meaning unless it expresses a thought of God", said he. One may compare this with what Einstein said of his theories. "I want to know what was in God&#39;s mind when he created the universe; Rest are details". Of course, if one interprets God as something more than an individual, as an all-pervading reality whatever these two great men have said carries much meaning.</p>
<p>He had studied the Hindu scriptures and mastered them. In his youth he attended a discourse by Ganesh Sastri on Sankhya Philosophy. The lecturer said "If there is a beginning, there is an end. If there is no beginning, there is no end. Karma has no beginning. Therefore it has no end. It merely goes around." Ramanujan immediately shot a question- "According to your school, then, there is no Moksha (salvation) at all". A startled lecturer could not answer the question at all. Then Ramanujan himself explained the reconciliation between Karma and Moksha. Details regarding Ramanujan&#39;s explanation are not available.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>// 39</p>
<p>Marriage and Unemployment</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The Young Bride</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>When Ramanujan was 19 years old, Komalatammal decided it was time that her son got married. In those days, marriage was seen as coming together of two families and not as union of a boy and a girl. The parents decided who the bride or the bridegroom should be. Komalathammal knew of the daughter of a distant relative. Her name was Janaki Ammal about 10 years younger than Ramanujan. She was the daughter of jewelry merchant, who had once been rich. It may seem surprising that a girl as young as nine could be married. But that again was the prevalent Hindu custom. Child marriage was the order of the day, it seems. Komalathammal went to Janaki Ammal&#39;s parents and obtained her horoscope. This was an essential document to find out whether the boy and the girl are going to be a good couple. Foremost requirement was that the two horoscopes match. Komalathammal held together the horoscopes of Ramanujan and Janaki Ammal and came to the conclusion that it was a good match.</p>
<p>Mother was keen on this marriage, but not the father Srinivasa Iyengar. To him Ramanujan was a failure; he had no degree, no job and could not stand on his own. But his opinion was totally ignored. It is not clear if he even attended the wedding. Poor Janaki</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>40 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 15: Janaki Ammal</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Ammal had no say whatever in her own marriage. The wedding did take place on July 14, 1909.</p>
<p>There was drama at the wedding. Janaki Ammal&#39;s father had arranged for his two daughters to be wed on the same day. Sister Vijayalakshmi&#39;s wedding took place as planned. The problem was with the wedding of Janaki Ammal. The train in which the groom&#39;s party including Ramanujan and his</p>
<p>mother travelled arrived very late at Kulittalai station close to Rajendram where the wedding was to take place. In fact, the groom and his mother arrived only at 1 am the next day. Janaki Ammal&#39;s irate father almost called off the wedding and contemplated marrying her off to another boy. An angry Komalatammal fumed and demanded that Janaki Ammal be married to her son and no one else - "How can you forego my son, a genius?"</p>
<p>It is said that a few inauspicious incidents took place during wedding. Those were the days when people believed that these brought bad luck. The very garland that Janaki Ammal was about to place around Ramanujan&#39;s neck fell down. Then there was a mentally retarded person shouting nearby. In addition, the pendal under which the wedding was taking place caught fire. It is not clear whether Komalathammal or anyone else took these seriously. In general, they are taken as bad omens.</p>
<p>As Janaki Ammal was still a child, it was decided that she should spend another three years with her mother getting trained in domestic chores before joining her husband. By then she would</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Marriage of Unemployment // 41</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>have attained puberty and will be fit to live with her husband. The young bride may not have even understood what this meant!</p>
<p>Health and well being were always a problem for Ramanujan. It was 1910. He was now diagnosed with hydrocele and had to be operated upon. It meant a large amount of money which was just not there. Luckily a surgeon Dr Kuppu Swamy performed the operation free of charge. Chloroform was administered as Ramanujan lay on the bed and his senses began to fade. It is said that he could remember the order in which the sense organs were blocked. It took time for the wound to heal.</p>
<p>&#39;Just examine these Books&#39;</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>By 1907, it became imperative that he earned an income. Kumbakonam was not the right place to be in to seek a job. Perhaps, Chennai was better; it had many colleges and offices. One could find some employment there. With this intention, Ramanujan moved to Chennai where he could afford only a shared accommodation. First he lived with Viswanatha Shastry one of his private students, then with one, Narasimha Iyengar. Later his old rival from Town High School - Sarangapani Iyengar gave him shelter. The animosity he bore earlier had vanished and Sarangapani helped him without any hesitation. Ramanujan&#39;s situation was so dire that even basics were an issue. However Ramanujan was very sociable, mixed with others, made jokes and narrated anecdotes always. His friends and mates liked him. His mathematics never left him. He still refused to give up on his theorems. He used to run short of paper. Then he used red ink on already written sheets, so he could keep working.</p>
<p>The necessity to earn increased after he got married. With this added responsibility, Ramanujan could not afford to be jobless anymore. For two years, he went from door to door in search of a job or a scholarship, which would fetch him money. Usually a jobseeker</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>42 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>is armed with relevant paperwork - certificates, documents, referrals, transcripts and awards, as a testimony of his ability. Ramanujan sadly had none of these. He was a college drop out. But he did have something unique, something very precious, which was almost impossible for others - his notebooks. He carried them everywhere and showed them to the influential people he came across. "Just examine these books", he would plead. There may not be many examples of artists or scientists who have carried their masterpiece from door to door soliciting support.</p>
<p>Very few could understand what was in those notebooks. Such higher order thinking contained in the material was beyond them. Of course, there were some who were good in mathematics. They would not believe the results; they were too good to be true. Further, the common opinion was, "A college drop out. How can he come up with all these theorems? He must be cheating. Does he know what he is talking about?" There were others who just praised him, but could do nothing.</p>
<p>Among the people he met was one, V Ramaswamy Iyer in Villupuram. He appreciated Ramanujan for his work but could only offer the position of a clerk in the revenue office. This would be a mockery of Ramanujan&#39;s merit. So he gave him an introduction letter addressed to Seshu Iyer who had been Ramanujan&#39;s teacher in the past. Another letter of introduction followed! Then he met Balakrishna Iyer who was also appreciative of his work but not big enough to influence the employers.</p>
<p>His pointless job pursuit went on. Those who appreciated his work could not offer a position. Instead they directed him to acquaintances and gave letters of introduction. Ramanujan collected heaps of such introduction letters, but no position.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Marriage of Unemployment // 43</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Sadly, Ramanujan&#39;s health started to fail once more. The physical exertion, mental stress and frustration began to take their toll. He had to return to Kumbakonam for treatment. He was deeply disturbed. While leaving for his hometown, he handed over two notebooks to his friend, Radhakrishna Iyer and requested, "If I die, please give these to Singaravelu Mudaliar or Edward Ross." Both were his former lecturers. It seems idea of death had already begun to haunt him. However Ramanujan did collect the books back.</p>
<p>Finally, a mentor</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>This unhappy trail ended when he was introduced to R. Ramachandra Rao, the collector of Nellore. A benevolent person, Rao was a mathematician himself and took a paternal interest in Ramanujan&#39;s work. The two had two or three meetings. Rao too could not decide what to offer him. It seemed he could only offer a clerical job at the Taluk (County) Office in Nellore. This would have been an insult to</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 16: Ramachandra Rao, Mentor</p>
<p>Ramanujan who was breaking new grounds in mathematics. Learning</p>
<p>this, a disappointed Ramanujan decided to go back to Kumbakonam. Rao, thankfully changed his mind and offered him, out of his pocket, a scholarship of Rs 25 a month to continue his mathematical adventures in Chennai. He paid him the train fare to Chennai as well. Rao remained one of Ramanujan&#39;s well wishers for the rest of his life.</p>
<p>The scholarship gave new hope to Ramanujan. If nothing else, the meager funding kept him going. Ramanujan found himself a lodging in Triplicane that he shared with twelve others. The beachside suburb in Chennai was the ideal place for him. With the Parthasarathy temple</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>44 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>virtually at his doorstep and the fresh sea breeze, he found peace once more. Maths poured out effortlessly as he sat to work on theorems at the Marina Beach. Lady Luck finally seemed to favour him. The lodge where he lived has now been demolished. Further, it is a pity that even the plaque that said "Srinivasa Ramanujan lived here" has been removed and destroyed.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 17: Ramanujan&#39;s house in Chennai (Now demolished)</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Indian Mathematical Society</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Three people seem to have influenced Ramanujan&#39;s career. First it is his mother, next is Prof. Hardy of Cambridge University as we will see later. The third is definitely S. Narayana Iyer. As the name indicates he was not an Iyengar but he was an Iyer. He was born on December 15, 1874 in Cumbum near Madurai in the Tamil Nadu state. Deeply religious, he was a mathematician of repute, probably one of the most capable in India then. We will see later that Ramanujan developed a very productive companionship with him even though he was an elderly person. Narayana Iyer was a MA in mathematics which was the highest qualification one could achieve in any of the subjects those days. Doctorate degree (PhD) was introduced much later. He worked as a lecturer at the St Joseph College in Trichy. He was</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Marriage of Unemployment // 45</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>also a founding member of what was called Analytical Club and was its first Assistant Secretary. In 1906, this club became the Indian Mathematical society with Ramaswamy Iyer as its founder. It had as its members some of the academics in major Indian cities such as Bombay, Madras, Bangalore, Calcutta and other places. Aimed at promoting mathematics in India, the society had a journal of its own. It provided an appropriate platform for the Indian mathematicians to publish their work.</p>
<p>Needless to say, Ramanujan took an active interest in the activities of the society. Narayana Iyer and Ramaswamy Iyer were there to encourage him to contribute to the journal. To start with he would attempt to answer some of the unsolved problems published in the journal and submit his own unsolved problems. One such problem he submitted was to evaluate the complex term-</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1 2 1  3 1 ...</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>This is an expression with nested square roots. It seemed a very difficult and formidable problem to solve. There was no response from the readers. In the end Ramanujan gave the solution himself. The answer is 3.</p>
<p>Ramanujan had not tried yet to publish his results. Once he told somebody "Lord Narasimha appeared in my dream and said that time has not come for making public the fruits of my research." So he had to wait. That time seems to have come now. Encouraged by his mentors, Ramanujan submitted a paper on Bernoulli Numbers to this journal, which was published in 1911.</p>
<p>Bernoulli Numbers (Bn in the following formula) are the sequence of signed rational numbers generated by the exponential function-</p>
<p></p>
<p>x  B xn</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>ex 1</p>
<p>  n</p>
<p>n 0 n!</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>46 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Ramanujan discovered the denominators of the fractions of the Bernoulli Numbers were divisible by 6 and gave a method of calculating</p>
<p>Bn which depended on Bn - 1, Bn - 2 etc. Details can be obtained from papers.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>With this publication, Ramanujan was catapulted beyond the limited Chennai scene. He was launched into the larger Indian space. Established mathematicians looked at his work in awe: "Is this the work of a college drop out!"</p>
<p>It was now that K.S. Srinivasan, one of his classmates in Kumbakonam met Ramanujan and said;</p>
<p>"Ramanju, they call you a genius!"</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Ramanujan laughed and replied, "Look at this."</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>He showed him his left elbow. It had become hard and black. This was due to the manner of his working. He used a slate and a chalk. Whenever something he had written down was wrong, he preferred to erase it with his left elbow. Searching for a rag was a waste of time. This had resulted in the hardening of the elbow.</p>
<p>"Really, the elbow has made me a genius." "Ramanuju, you should use paper instead."</p>
<p>"Yes, but when food itself is a problem, how can I find money for paper? I may require about four reams of paper every month."</p>
<p>That was the pathetic condition under which a great mathematics took its shape. If anybody around him knew of what he was turning out maybe tons of paper would have flown in!</p>
<p>Ramanujan seemed to have unbounded kindness. He had a friend called Narasimha Iyengar who had to write the "Intermediate" examination. Ramanujan guided him and on the day of his examination,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Marriage of Unemployment // 47</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>he walked four miles to the venue and cheered Narasimhan. Of course, he got through the examination.</p>
<p>An incident attributed to Ramanujan took place during this time. He was talking to his friends, of course on mathematics and astronomical wonders, particularly his theory of reality. The passionate conversation lasted well into the night. He was overwhelmed with his own talking and sweating profusely. One of his mates was sleeping in the adjacent room. His sleep got disturbed. As revenge he brought a pitcher full of cold water and poured it over his head. Ramanujan exclaimed that it was Gangasnanam (a bath in River Ganges) for him.</p>
<p>At the Madras Port</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Ramanujan remained under Rao&#39;s sponsorship for about fifteen months, but began to feel that it was not right on his part to accept a charity. Instead he should earn his living. So he requested Rao not to send him money every month.</p>
<p>In addition to providing financial backing required, the far- sighted and pragmatic Rao helped the self-taught Ramanujan organize himself. He had seen the first notebook of Ramanujan. It was the outpouring of a genius no doubt; but it was chaotic and haphazard. In addition, he had kept the papers all over his room in a very careless manner. Rao feared that they may be lost or spoiled. So he suggested that Ramanujan write out the equations and formulas in an orderly manner. Ramanujan undertook this and copied his theorems methodically and numbered them systematically. That is how his second notebook came about. Students and researchers worldwide have thus been able to follow Ramanujan&#39;s watershed work. The maths community is deeply indebted to this selfless soul R. Ramchandra Rao.</p>
<p>Meanwhile, Ramanujan went on to write another paper for the Journal of the Indian Mathematical society.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>48 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The members of the Indian Mathematical Society realized that Ramanujan was a brilliant mathematician of a high order. By now he had collected a number of well wishers. These included Ramaswami Iyer, Seshu Iyer , Narayana Iyengar and others. Narayana Iyer, now the treasurer of the society, was, perhaps the chief among these. He was no longer teaching in the St Joseph College. In 1900 he had accepted an invitation from Sir Francis Spring to be the office manager at the Port Trust in Madras. Then he became the Chief Accountant. All the well wishers thought that they should somehow provide Ramanujan with some support and keep his mathematics going. They struck a deal. Why not Narayana Iyer appoint him as a clerk at the port? Iyer was happy to be of help. So was his boss Sir Francis Spring. Upon Iyer&#39;s suggestion, Ramanujan promptly sent out an application:</p>
<p>"9th February 1912 Sir,</p>
<p>I understand there is a clerkship vacant in your office, and I beg to apply for the same. I have passed the matriculation examination and studied up to the F.A. but was prevented from pursuing my studies further owing to several untoward circumstances. I have, however, been devoting all my time to mathematics and developing the subject. I can say I am quite confident I can do justice to my work if I am appointed to the post. I therefore beg to request that you will be good enough to confer the appointment on me.</p>
<p>I beg to remain,</p>
<p>Sir, Your most obedient servant,</p>
<p>S. Ramanujan".</p>
<p>The letter reflects the plight of Ramanujan - a genius whose potential and greatness were as yet unrecognized.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Marriage of Unemployment // 49</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Figure 18: S Narayana Iyer, Mentor</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>No doubt, Ramanujan was appointed as a Class III, Grade IV clerk at Rs 30 a month. Later he was promoted to be a "Sinecure". Now Ramanujan had Narayana Iyer close to him; somebody with whom he could talk mathematics.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>50 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>Career gathers momentum</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Financial security</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Finally, Ramanujan had a job and could support his family. Mother Komalatammal and wife Janaki Ammal joined him immediately. The three lived with his grandmother. Komalatammal, being the stereotypical mother in law, exercised total control over the household. It was an accepted norm back then; both her son and daughter in law were young. Mother in law had the unwritten authority to control both her son and daughter in law. Not only was she autocratic, it is said that she did not allow the young couple to be together. The reasons for this could be that she wanted to exercise her control. Then she was aware of the genius that her son was. She wanted him to rise to greater heights. Janaki Ammal might become a retarding force!</p>
<p>Mr. Viswanathan, the grandson (daughter&#39;s son) of Narayana Iyer tells a very interesting fact. It seems Narayana Iyer&#39;s wife needed help in many of the domestic chores. She would request the help of Koamalathammal who readily obliged. Sometimes Iyer&#39;s wife would ask that Janaki Ammal be sent instead. This was clearly the mastermind of Narayana Iyer. When Janaki Ammal arrived for "work" Iyer would tell her</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Career gathers momentum // 51</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>"Do go upstairs of your house and talk to Ramanujan. Get closer to him. Don&#39;t worry about your mother in law. There is nothing wrong in this."</p>
<p>He was trying to put the relationship in order. To what extent Janaki Ammal was able to do it is not known.</p>
<p>Ramanujan however was hugely relieved to be financially secure and never concerned himself with the mundane affairs. He worked on his theorems and numbers round the clock. He would often ask his mother to wake him up by midnight and he would keep working till 6 in the morning. He would rest for a few hours before heading off to work. The redeeming feature was that his duty at the port was in no way taxing.</p>
<p>His boss Narayana Iyer was not only sympathetic towards Ramanujan, but also collaborated with him in mathematics. They would meet up at Iyer&#39;s home after work, to tackle complex theorems. As is to be expected, Ramanujan was much faster than Iyer. He would be miles ahead. Iyer would request him to be slow down and supply some intermediate steps so that he too could understand what was going on.</p>
<p>Narayana Iyer had understood Ramanujan thoroughly and was aware of his shortcomings. He helped him with English. More importantly he introduced Ramanujan to the western notation in mathematics. Due to a variety of reasons it was Iyer that communicated some of his results to the Journal of Indian Mathematical Society.</p>
<p>Once, Sir Francis Spring was surprised to find mathematical formulae on the packing paper to be used in the port. On another occasion he opened an important official file and found numerous sheets of mathematics in it! Elliptic Integrals everywhere! He laughed</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>52 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>at it and summoned Iyer and showed him. Then both of them had a hearty laugh. The culprit was our genius, no doubt. But it was evident that neither Francis nor Iyer expected Ramanujan to do any clerical work. His salary was just another form of scholarship money. Not only did Iyer and Francis acknowledge Ramanujan&#39;s genius, they never once showed resentment, jealousy or malice towards the petty clerk. Instead, the duo always encouraged him.</p>
<p>By 1912, Sir Francis and Iyer had begun to appreciate Ramanujan&#39;s intellectual prowess. Admiring him, leading professors in India now used to say "we cannot explain it. Ramanujan is a phenomenon." Francis and Iyer thought that somehow they should introduce this phenomenon to a wider audience abroad. Back then Oxford and Cambridge were regarded as the ultimate seats of learning. A British stamp of approval was vital to make a mark on the international scene.</p>
<p>The two began to explore means to spread his fame. This they knew could be achieved if his papers and theorems appeared in foreign journals. Sir Francis Spring had extensive contacts in India and England that could be of help. One such was Griffith from the Madras Engineering College, who in turn contacted M. J. M. Hill, a professor of mathematics in London. The aim was to get Ramanujan&#39;s paper published by the London Mathematical Society. Hill went through the paper and shot down the proposal - "Ramanujan is evidently a man with a taste for mathematics and with some ability but he has got on to wrong lines". He would not forward the paper to any society Instead he suggests that Ramanujan study a textbook by Bromwich - "Theory of infinite series."</p>
<p>Two other professors H. F. Baker and Hobson were tried, but they returned the papers without comment. The implied answer was No.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Career gathers momentum // 53</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The next to be contacted was Godfrey Hardy or G. H. Hardy, a young professor at Cambridge. Ramanujan wrote the letter and with it sent nine pages of mathematical material including about 60 theorems for him to browse. The available pages of the letter are shown in Appendix.</p>
<p>The Letter</p>
<p>The historic letter that Ramanujan wrote to Hardy reads ---</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>"Dear Sir,</p>
<p>I beg to introduce myself to you as a clerk in the Accounts Department of the Port Trust Office at Madras on a salary of only £ 20 per annum. I have had no university education but I have undergone the ordinary school course.</p>
<p>After leaving school I have been employing the spare time at my disposal to work at mathematics. I have not trodden through the conventional regular course which is followed in a university course, but I am striking out a new path for myself.</p>
<p>I have made a special investigation of divergent series in general and the results I get are termed by the local mathematicians as "startling"…</p>
<p>I would request you to go through the enclosed papers. Being poor, if you are convinced that there is anything of value I would like to have my theorems published. I have not given the actual investigations nor the expressions that I get but I have indicated the lines on which I proceed.</p>
<p>Being inexperienced I would very highly value any advice you give me. Requesting to be excused for any trouble I give you.</p>
<p>I remain Dear Sir Yours Truly</p>
<p>S. Ramanujan."</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>54 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Godfrey Herald Hardy</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Hardy was a very famous English mathematician in the fields of Number Theory and Mathematical Analysis including Diophantine analysis, summation of divergent series, Fourier series, the Riemann zeta function, and the distribution of primes.</p>
<p>He was born on February 7, 1877 in Surrey, England. He hailed from a family of mathematicians. As a two year old child, he could write numbers up to millions and even factorise the number of the hymns. After schooling in Cranleigh he studied at the Winchester College known for mathematical teaching. Hardy then entered the Trinity College, Cambridge in 1896 and he became a lecturer at the same place in 1906. He is said to have</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 19: G H Hardy</p>
<p>brought rigour into English Mathematics. He is known for Hardy -</p>
<p>Weinberg principle used in population genetics. One of his students has described him as ""He was an extremely kind-hearted man, who could not bear any of his pupils to fail in their researches." His collaboration with J. E. Littlewood lasted almost 35 years and has led to extensive contributions to Mathematical Analysis and Analytical Number theory. In the words of a Danish mathematician, "Nowadays, there are only three really great English mathematicians: Hardy, Littlewood, and Hardy- Littlewood."</p>
<p>Barely a decade older than Ramanujan, Hardy was already a Fellow of the Royal Society and a professor. He was known to be</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Career gathers momentum // 55</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>an eccentric mathematician and had already established a reputation for himself, having written about 60 papers and 3 books.</p>
<p>Hardy Reads the Letter</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>It was end of January when Hardy received the letter from Ramanujan dated January 16, 1913. He calls it a very romantic day of his life; most of the events that occurred that day have been recorded by him and are very interesting.</p>
<p>At Cambridge, Hardy had an almost fixed routine. His day started with breakfast when he read his letters. That day there were not many letters, except for the missive from Ramanujan and a small postcard. The letter was in an awkward brown envelope and plastered with strange Indian stamps. The handwriting resembled that of a school kid, almost copybook type.</p>
<p>Hardy read the letter with curiosity and then browsed through the nine pages of equations that accompanied it. These contained a number of theorems in Number Theory, Definite Integrals and Infinite Series among others. Some had already been solved previously; some were definitely wrong and the others were strange, hard to believe. There was an air of mystery about them. Could they be true?</p>
<p>Hardy got suspicious. He was used to getting such letters from eccentrics not just about mathematics; but philosophy, literature and history as well. Could this letter be one such? Can all this be a hoax? Is it fraud? Or is it the work of a genius? Hardy could not decide. What irritated him most was that there was no proof for any of the theorems. The person had just stated them out. How was he to believe in him?</p>
<p>Hardy was aware of one fact - most brilliant people in the world were also eccentric. The writer of this letter, an Indian clerk, may well be one such!</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>56 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>He set aside the letter and read London Times. He was very passionate about cricket and followed the game played anywhere in the world. He read the day&#39;s reports. Then at 9am he put on his gown and walked to his room in the Trinity College. In fact this was the very college where the great scientist Isaac Newton had worked about two hundred years before him.</p>
<p>He usually worked for about four hours every day. He thought that so many hours of concentrated work including lecturing was sufficient for a day. He had to go through and revise a research paper by one of his students. He attended to it till lunchtime. But his mind was drawn again and again towards the letter. Is he genuine or a fraud?</p>
<p>Lunch was at the Hall. When he went there all the seats seemed to be taken up. The only vacant spot was next to Bertrand Russell, the celebrated philosopher and mathematician. An anti war protester, who was jailed for his activism, Russell had edited Principia Mathematica by Newton and written Problems in Modern Philosophy in just two years. Later he was even removed from Cambridge. The two men exchanged greetings and spoke briefly about cricket. Clearly Hardy had neither the appetite nor the mood for conversation. He desperately wanted to speak to Littlewood, a former student of his and eight years junior and now on staff at Trinity College. He was seated five places to his left on the opposite row; he just could not talk to him.</p>
<p>His habit after lunch was to watch cricket, being played in summer and tennis in winter. He went off to the fields. Yet the letter continued to intrigue him.</p>
<p>How can such theorems be possible? Could it be just a practical joke? Perhaps that letter deserved agitation on the part of Hardy.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Career gathers momentum // 57</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Much later, the letter itself became subject of many papers. Hardy spoke about the letter at many places. It gave rise to extensive research.</p>
<p>Darkness fell. Hardy had his supper at the Hall. He met Littlewood at dinner table and invited him for discussions after supper</p>
<p>- "There is something very important we need to look at." After supper he retired to his room and cancelled his usual port and walnuts.</p>
<p>Littlewood was however in no hurry for the meeting and carried on with his eating and drinking till 9pm before meeting Hardy.</p>
<p>The purpose of their meeting was clear - to evaluate the letter from the Indian clerk, Ramanujan. They spread his papers on a desk and tried to understand the contents bit by bit. Littlewood also found that some of the formulae were well known; some seemed impossible to believe. They went through the papers in great detail.</p>
<p>The mathematical part of the letter starts abruptly citing one of Hardy&#39;s results on Prime Numbers, namely an expression for number of prime numbers less than x. Then Ramanujan claims "I have found a function which exactly represents the number of prime numbers less than x……" It is in the form of an infinite series. Several expressions follow this. Then there are theorems on integrals, really complicated. For example,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>dx</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Note the symmetry and "beauty" of this expression. Then there are results on summation of series, such as,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> 1 4</p>
<p> 1 5 4</p>
<p> 15  9 4 2 2</p>
<p>1  9   4 </p>
<p> 17   4 8 </p>
<p> 25   4 8 12   2</p>
<p>     </p>
<p>  3 </p>
<p>   4 </p>
<p>  </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>58 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>This has been followed by theorems on transformation of series and integrals, such as,</p>
<p>  1  1  1  1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> 1  1 </p>
<p>1 ..</p>
<p> 2 1 </p>
<p>3 3 </p>
<p>5 5 </p>
<p> </p>
<p>7 1 1 3 3 5 5</p>
<p> </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Then there are theorems on approximate integration and summation of series. The next is on Continued Fractions. Among the divergent series were expressions such as</p>
<p>1 2  3  4 .  1</p>
<p>4</p>
<p>1 2  3  4    1 .</p>
<p>12</p>
<p>There are many equations and formulas under 11 different heads. The range of topics, though all fall under "Pure Mathematics" is baffling. No doubt nothing was evident and straight forward in the beginning.</p>
<p>Soon, Hardy and Littlewood began to understand the notation used by Ramanujan. The theorems unfolded themselves. The more they read, more dazzled they became. It was mathematics of the highest order. He was not a fraud, nor was he making a practical joke. After three hours of scrutiny it was very clear to them - the writer of the letter was indeed a true genius.</p>
<p>It is not that the two understood the theorems completely. Many doubts still remained. But from whatever they could interpret it was clear to them that Ramanujan was a great mathematician. Hardy writes later "There is always more in one of Ramanujan&#39;s formulae than meets the eye, as anyone that sets to work to verify those which look the easiest will soon discover. … In some the interest lies very deep, in others comparatively near the surface; but there is not one which is not curious and entertaining."</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Career gathers momentum // 59</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>&#39;We should bring him to Cambridge&#39;</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The letter, it appears, created a sensation in the mathematical circles of Cambridge. Hardy showed it to his other associates and friends. News spread like a wild fire. There was admiration for Ramanujan everywhere. Mathematicians in Cambridge and the Indian students were amazed at this genius. Now, Hardy made a decision</p>
<p>- "We should bring him to Cambridge." He got into action almost at once. He contacted several people, including those at the India Office and requested them to make arrangements to enable Ramanujan to be brought to Cambridge.</p>
<p>Hardy replied to Ramanujan&#39;s letter on February 8.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>"Dear Sir,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>I am exceedingly interested by your letter and by the theorems which you state. You will however understand that, before I can judge properly of the value of what you have done, it is essential that I should see proof of some of your assertions.</p>
<p>Your results seem to me to fall roughly into three classes:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>There are a number of results that are already known, or easily deducible from other theorems;</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>There are results which, so far as I know, are new and interesting, but interesting rather from their curiosity and apparent difficulty than their importance;</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>There are results which appear to be new and important, but in which almost everything depends on the precise rigour of the methods of proof which you have used.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>………………….</p>
<p>I hope very much that you will send me as quickly as possible at any rate a few of your proofs….. It seems to me quite likely</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>60 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>that you have done a good deal of work worth publication; and if you can produce satisfactory demonstrations, I should be very glad to do what I can do to secure it.</p>
<p>I am Yours very truly,</p>
<p>G.H. Hardy"</p>
<p>In this letter the word proof occurs many times. No doubt it is an encouraging letter but at the same time Hardy insisted that he should see the proofs for some of the theorems proposed.</p>
<p>The letter arrived in India and reached Ramanujan. But well before that some of the high officials in India had already learnt of Hardy&#39;s decision through the India Office.</p>
<p>There was celebration everywhere. Narayana Iyer and Sir Francis Spring were immensely pleased with the outcome. It seems Ramanujan got more than what he had asked for. Their only ambition so far had been the recognition of his work and possible publication in international journals. None of them including Ramanujan, had contemplated the possibility of his travelling to England. Clearly, Ramanujan had been now launched in the English space. There was joy everywhere in the family circles and in the Indian Mathematical Society. People rushed to take credit for this. Some of the professors and others who had totally dismissed Ramanujan before now began to say that they had contributed to his success in a big way.</p>
<p>Ramanujan replied to Hardy - "I have found a friend in you who views my labours sympathetically. This is already some encouragement to me to proceed with my onward course. I find in many a place in your letter rigorous proofs are required and so on and you ask me to communicate the methods of proof. If I had given you my methods of proof I am sure you will follow the London Professor. But as a fact I did not give him any</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Career gathers momentum // 61</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>proof but made some assertions as the following under my new theory. I told him that the sum of the infinite number of terms of the series: 1 + 2+ 3 + 4+ …. = - (1/12) under my theory. If I tell you this you will at once point to me the lunatic asylum as my goal. I dilate on this simply to convince you that you will not be able to follow my methods of proof if I indicate the lines on which I proceed in a single letter. You may ask how you can accept results based on wrong premises. What I tell you is this. Verify the results I give and if they agree with your results, got by treading on the groove in which the present day mathematicians move, you should at least grant that there may be some truths in my fundamental basis. So what I now want at this stage is for eminent professors like you to recognize that there is some worth in me. I am already a half starving man. To preserve my brains I want food and this is my first consideration. Any sympathetic letter from you will be helpful to me here to get a scholarship either from the university of from the government.. … You may judge me hard that I am silent on the methods of proof. I have to reiterate that I may be misunderstood if I give in a short compass the lines on which I proceed. It is not on account of unwillingness on my part but I fear that I shall not be able to explain everything in a letter. I do not mean that the methods should be buried with me. I shall have them published if my results are recognized by eminent men like you!"</p>
<p>Clearly, Ramanujan leaves Hardy in puzzle by speaking of his own method of proof. No doubt, he had his own notation. We cannot be very sure what method of proof he had.</p>
<p>To go or not go to Cambridge</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Hardy and his associates however were not aware of the stringent conditions that religion had imposed on Ramanujan. He was not only a devout Hindu but also an orthodox Brahmin. There was a rigorous code of conduct prescribed for Brahmins. Crossing the seas was taboo, as was eating meat or drinking wine. He also had</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>62 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>to follow certain customs rigidly. Further, one can easily guess that Ramanujan&#39;s mother Komalatammal would not allow him to visit a foreign land. She was anxious about his wellbeing. She had single handedly raised him with so much care. Going to Cambridge seemed out of question! Hardy was informed of this decision.</p>
<p>But Hardy was determined to have Ramanujan. He was a man who would leave no stone unturned to achieve his goal. So far, he had moved all the required machinery in the university, government and India Office to facilitate his visit. All human efforts had been made. What now seemed necessary was a divine intervention. Even that did happen, as we will see later!</p>
<p>As news spread of Hardy&#39;s invitation, there was new support for Ramanujan. The man who had been recognised by the great mathematician Hardy, could not be kept rotting as a clerk in a Port Office. Something had to be done - was the unanimous response. The Government of Madras took up the issue and recommended that he be awarded a scholarship of 75 rupees a month. But it was pointed out by the University of Madras that such a scholarship could be awarded only to post graduates. Ramanujan was not even a graduate. However, the university noted that he was special; it bent its rules and okayed the scholarship. As a result Ramanujan entered the Presidency College in Chennai as a scholar. He was obliged to submit a progress report once every three months. At last, some stability came into his life; he seemed financially sound.</p>
<p>Now it was mathematics full time. There was no need to dabble with accounts in an office. He was within an academic environment once more. The sessions with Narayana Iyer continued as did midnight mathematics. As recollected by his wife Janaki Ammal, he would often even forget his meal. Many a time his grandmother would mix rice and sambar and serve morsels of it right on his hand.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Career gathers momentum // 63</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Ramanujan preferred this as sitting in front of a plate or banana leaf wasted precious time and interrupted his chain of thought. His mother would prepare his favourite eggplant dish - stuffed with a spicy lentil mix and pan-fried. Poor Janaki Ammal found him working all the time. But she could follow nothing of what he did.</p>
<p>Ramanujan&#39;s house became a pilgrim spot. People passed through the street just to have a glimpse of the genius. Lecturers descended in hordes to meet him.</p>
<p>During this time in 1913, Professor Ross at the Madras Christian College was surprised to read a quarterly report that Ramanujan had submitted. There was a beautiful theorem in it. Ross had seen such a theorem in the latest issue of a Polish Mathematical Journal. But to the credit of Ramanujan, his theorem was much deeper than that of the Polish mathematician. Of course, he was totally unaware of the Polish work.</p>
<p>All his contacts including Ramachandra Rao, Seshu Iyer, Narayana Iyengar from Bangalore and others tried to put pressure on Ramanujan and Komalathammal to forget all religious scruples. They all wanted him to go to Cambridge. He was their pride and his name should shine everywhere.</p>
<p>He had considerable correspondence with Hardy. It was always mathematics, theorems and proof. In one such Hardy indicated that a student of his, E. H. Neville would be a Visiting Lecturer at the University in Chennai to lecture on Differential Geometry during the winter months of 1913-14. It would be a good idea for Ramanujan to meet him, he added. Clearly Hardy had set up Neville to persuade Ramanujan to visit Cambridge.</p>
<p>Indeed, it is such an honour to have to be persuaded. It is not uncommon now for students in India to try to gain admission into</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>64 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>well known universities abroad, often taking recourse to desperate measures when the path gets tricky. Yet, here we have the example of a self-taught genius, who saw no reason to go, despite the repeated invitations of senior academia from Cambridge.</p>
<p>Neville started his lectureship at Chennai. Ramanujan was introduced to him after one of the lectures. They had three sessions together with the Notebook in front of them. The meetings took place on the Marina Beach in Chennai. They seem to have discussed Ramanujan&#39;s work on numbers; the volume of it astonished Neville. It is said that Ramanujan even offered to loan him the Notebook. This apparently surprised Neville; it was the first time that Ramanujan had given the book to anyone to browse through.</p>
<p>At the appropriate time Neville extended an invitation for Ramanujan to visit Cambridge; he readily accepted! Neville was taken aback and wrote to Hardy "Ramanujan needed no converting and his parent&#39;s opposition had been withdrawn."</p>
<p>Ramanujan then asked question that was boiling within him</p>
<p>- "Do I have to write any examinations in Cambridge?" Much to his satisfaction, Neville replied "None whatever!"</p>
<p>What was the reason for this change in stand? Where did this readiness come from? Who persuaded Ramanujan to change his mind? The answer lies in metaphysics.</p>
<p>The Revealing Letter</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>It is generally believed that Ramanujan did not want to travel to Cambridge because of the religious impositions. However, a close look at his letter to Hardy written on January 22, 1914 reveals many interesting facts.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Career gathers momentum // 65</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>" ……….Now I learn from your letter and Mr Neville that you are anxious to get me to Cambridge. If you had written to me previously I would have expressed my thoughts plainly to you. In February when I was at Port Trust the secretary to the students Advisory Committee of Madras wrote to me that I have been asked by Mr. Mallet of India Office to see me and therefore I might go and see him next noon. The chairman of the Port Trust asked my superior officer to go with me and answer his questions. Accordingly the next we went to him and he asked us whether I was prepared to go to England. While I was hesitating to reply him as the question appeared vague to me and I naturally was thinking whether I had to appear for any examination with my very poor educational qualification as I used to see students from here going to England only for appearing for some examination, my superior officer, a very orthodox Brahmin having scruples to go to foreign land replied at once that I could not go to England and the matter was dropped.</p>
<p>After that I had no correspondence from you. Then I wrote a reminder to you which, I think you have not received. Another thing that I have to say to you is that all letters written to you, except this one and the remainder, did not contain my language. Those were written by my superior officer mentioned before, though the mathematical results and handwriting were my own. I am writing all these things plain to you so that you may judge properly my knowledge of English and power of expression of thought as they are "</p>
<p>It is clear that the superior officer is Narayana Iyer. The English officer who wanted to meet Ramanujan was Arthur Davies. It appears that it was Narayana Iyer that stated that Ramanujan cannot undertake a foreign travel.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>66 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>It is not surprising that Narayana Iyer had answered on behalf of Ramanujan. Iyer himself was a religious man with orthodox habits. He was naturally aware of the reaction of Ramanujan and his family towards a foreign travel. It appears that there was a general opposition. He had acted accordingly.</p>
<p>The above letter written by Ramanujan to Hardy has been seen as "face saving" by Kanigel. Maybe at first he did not want to travel because of religious scruples. Now that he was prepared to travel, he needed an excuse or an explanation for his previous rejection. One should not ignore that he had another fear - that of examinations. He had seen students going to England for obtaining higher degrees. They had obviously written examinations overseas. Ramanujan&#39;s failures in Kumakonam had made him scary of examinations. Surely, the specter of examinations and failure still haunted him.</p>
<p>There seems to be a hidden purpose why Ramanujan wrote this letter to Hardy. All the previous letters that he wrote were dictated by Narayana Iyer as his English was not up to the mark. He wanted to reveal this to Hardy and also exhibit his own English which according to him was poor.</p>
<p>The Dream</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>It was indeed a great day for mathematics. Komalatammal had a dream. She saw a vision of Ramanujan in the company of elite European academicians. Goddess Namagiri of Namakkal appeared and ordered her, "Your son is a great man. Illustrious things lay ahead of him. Do not stand in the way of his ambitions." With the divine blessings, Komalatammal gave her seal of approval. There was no way she could disobey Namagiri.</p>
<p>There has been another suggestion as well. Well before the mother dreamt, Iyer sought to help him realising that Ramanujan&#39;s</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Career gathers momentum // 67</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>mind was in turmoil over the impending trip- To go or not to go. He took Ramanujan to Namakkal to offer special prayers to Goddess Namagiri. She alone could decide one way or the other. They did what is called Seva for three days. A seva has its own protocol and calls for a strict observance of it. One such is to eat only the prasadam that is served at the temple. It is said that after three days, Ramanujan dreamt of a flash of light and woke up in the middle of the night. This was taken as the divine approval or command for the trip. The two decided that Ramanujan should accept the invitation and travel to Cambridge.</p>
<p>Thus Narayana Iyer was a driving force, after his mother, for Ramanujan. In the words of his grandson Mr. Viswanathan,</p>
<p>"Like Johnson&#39;s Boswell, Ramanujan&#39;s Narayana Iyer knew his full capabilities and the hidden genius in him. He was also aware of Ramanujan&#39;s family background - utter poverty. (As my sister pointed out, Ramanujan went around showing his work sheets to people requesting for money). Narayana Iyer fully knew to what extent Ramanujan&#39;s family depended on Ramanujan; so also his personal complexes: (1) about his poor educational qualification. (2) Very orthodox and dominating mother (Oedipus Complex?)</p>
<p>(3) The feeling that his English was not up to the mark. (4) His hesitation that he might have to appear for some examination if he was to go to England."</p>
<p>It is clear that "If that recognition had not been there, Ramanujan might have suffered the same fate as many a flower born to blush unseen."</p>
<p>Now family, friends and mentors of Ramanujan were aligned to the one and only one event - his imminent overseas trip. His peers and well-wishers welcomed it. However, both his father and father in law were against the idea. His father in law said, "Can&#39;t he do his mathematics here in India? What is the need to travel to Cambridge?" He could pursue his passion locally, they thought. And</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>68 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 20: Namagiri Temple in Namakkal</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>though Komalatammal had given Ramanujan permission, she was apprehensive of his health. She was fully aware how fragile was his constitution. Naturally she feared that he might not take care of himself in a foreign land. "What is he going to eat there?"</p>
<p>Once when the mother in law was away out of sight, Janaki Ammal begged her husband to take her with him to England. The answer was NO. Rao and others had advised that he should go alone and concentrate on his mathematics. Further, Janaki Ammal was too young to live in a foreign country. "How will she survive there without knowing the language?" How nice it would have been if she had accompanied him! His life might have changed for the better!</p>
<p>Funding for his travel and stay in Cambridge had to be found. Neville took charge of this. He was able to persuade universities of Madras and Cambridge to provide 250 pounds as scholarship and another 100 pounds for his clothing. The ship fare from Chennai to London (440 rupees, a sum that is worth hundred times as much today) was also provided.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Career gathers momentum // 69</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Elaborate preparation was required for his trip. First of all, Ramanujan had to be initiated into English customs and etiquette such as wearing a suit, eating on a table with fork and knife. The young genius underwent informal training at a household, where the family practiced English habits. He was made to get his tuft cut off. Maybe Ramachandra Rao was responsible for this. In addition, he was also forced into an English suit. He did not like these at all. These were painful!</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 21: Ramanujan’s Slate</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Before his departure several distinguished people joined hands with the advocate general to give Ramanujan a send off party. What an honour compared to his jobless days just a year ago! Hardy&#39;s encouraging reply to his letter had done wonders. His mentor, Narayana Iyer made a special request - "Can we swap our slates? I would like to keep yours as memento." The request was granted. The slate is very well preserved in Chennai by one of the grandsons of Narayana Iyer.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>70 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>Cambridge</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Ramanujan leaves India</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Ramanujan left Chennai on March 17, 1914 at 10 in the morning on board the ship called Nevasa. Those were the days when ship was the only mode of transport to cross the seas. Many of the well-wishers were happy that Ramanujan&#39;s brilliance had finally been recognised in England. But he was in tears as he left India. His associates have felt that he was not very enthusiastic to leave India. One of his friends, it is said, requested the captain of the ship to take good care of him. "I will, as long as he does not bore me with mathematics!" the captain quipped. Of course, vegetarian food was assured in the ship.</p>
<p>The ship sailed via Aden where it halted for a week. It reached England on April 14 after voyaging through the English Channel. The port of entry to England was at the mouth of River Thames. Neville along with his brother (who had a car) waited there to receive Ramanujan. Then he was driven to 21, Cromwell Road in South Kensington. That was the place where the Indian students were received upon their arrival in England. Neville took him to Cambridge four days later. Ramanujan initially stayed with Neville and his wife Alice, who lived across River Cam, which gives Cambridge its name.</p>
<p>Ramanujan was enrolled into Cambridge as a student! There were paperwork and formalities to be completed; fees amounting to</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Cambridge // 71</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>twenty pounds had to be paid. Hardy and Neville took care of all these. Ramanujan had nothing to worry about except mathematics.</p>
<p>Work began at Cambridge almost at once. Not alone in his endeavors, he now had the company of Hardy and Littlewood. The trio met often and discussed his work.</p>
<p>Ramanujan had no examinations or tests to prepare for; instead he attended as many lectures as possible. Hardy and Berry were among those who lectured. Ramanujan&#39;s brilliance came to be known during the lectures. Berry was teaching Elliptic Integrals. A smiling Ramanujan seemed to be emerging with something as he sat through the lecture. Berry enquired whether he wanted to add anything to whatever he was proving on the blackboard. At once Ramanujan went to the blackboard, took a piece of chalk and wrote down whatever Berry would have arrived at much later. This surprised everyone. Ramanujan became a sensation in Cambridge as well. Berry states "Ramanujan must have reached these results by pure intuition. His facility in the theory of numbers was in a large measure intuitive. He made numerous conjectures, like other pure mathematicians. Many of his results apparently came to his mind without any effort. He was, however, aware that a good deal of intellectual work would be required to establish his philosophical theories."</p>
<p>After spending about six weeks with the Nevilles, Ramanujan moved to Whelwell&#39;s Court near staircase P. (In Cambridge and Oxford, rooms were identified by the staircase close to them; each staircase had a name or a number). Now his accommodation was very close to Hardy&#39;s room making any meeting easier for the two.</p>
<p>An elite institution</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Prior to the First World War, Cambridge and Oxford Universities were regarded as the highest seats of learning in the world. Despite losing out to emerging American Universities in the post war era,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>72 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 22: Entrance to Trinity College</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Cambridge continues to hold its unique place even today. Since 1904, it has won a whopping 88 Nobel Prizes (29 in Physics, 25 in Medicine, 21 in Chemistry, 9 in Economics, 2 in Literature and 2 in Peace). Of these, 32 were bagged by Trinity College alone, where Hardy worked.</p>
<p>The prominence of Cambridge is evident, when we note the number of illustrious scientists who have been associated with it.</p>
<p>Francis Bacon (father of empiricism and scientific method), Isaac Newton (gravity and the laws of motion), J. J. Thomson (discovery of electron), Ernest Rutherford (nuclear physics), Sir John Cockcroft (who discovered neutron), James Clerk Maxwell (electromagnetic theory), Ernest Walton (who split the atom), Henry Cavendish (discovery of Hydrogen), Charles Darwin (Theory of Evolution), Alan Turing (modern computer), Francis Crick and James Watson (the duo who found the structure of DNA), Paul Dirac (Quantum Mechanics), John Herschel & Sir Arthur Eddington</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Cambridge // 73</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(astronomers), Lord Kelvin (Thermodynamics) and Sir Jagadish Chandra Bose (Radio Science). The list goes on…</p>
<p>To this list can be added, the names of celebrated poets such as Tennyson and Byron, social scientists, economists, artists, politicians and prime ministers.</p>
<p>Intellectual Paradise</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Within these celebrated halls of learning, Ramanujan&#39;s unstoppable genius flourished. Now that Hardy was simply a door knock away, there was no longer the ordeal of writing letters or the unending wait for replies. Furthermore, Hardy, Littlewood and Neville were very unassuming and kind people, who went out of their way to make Ramanujan comfortable in a new and alien environment.</p>
<p>The Hindu in Madras carried a news item on May 13, 1914</p>
<p>-"Mr S Ramanujan of Madras, whose work in higher Mathematics has excited the wonder of Cambridge, is now in residence at Trinity. He will read mainly with the two fellows of the college - Mr. Hardy and Mr. Littlewood. They are going through masses of work he has already done and are making some surprising discoveries in it!"</p>
<p>He had people that he could talk with. The atmosphere was congenial and mathematics prevailed above all. Hardy would sit with him and go through the Notebooks step by step, clearing any doubts. One equation in his first letter, which puzzled Hardy and Littlewood, was:</p>
<p>1 2  3  4  5    1</p>
<p>12</p>
<p>How could the sum of positive numbers be negative? Moreover it is a divergent series whose sum is unbounded. The very expression seemed ridiculous and impossible. Then, it turned out that it was</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>74 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Ramanujan&#39;s way of expressing things! He had his own reasoning behind it. Now it made sense. Hardy also learnt of the strange notations that Ramanujan had followed. He reestablished that some of the theorems in the notebooks were brilliant, others had already established some of the results and some were evidently wrong.</p>
<p>However, Hardy&#39;s assessment of Ramanujan&#39;s work had to be revised from time to time. There were a few thousand theorems, providing enough fodder for the mathematicians. One of his peers gave his comments on the workload: " If I had pursued that path, a life time would have been required. I could not have done anything with myself!"</p>
<p>But others did follow his work. Eventually, many of the theorems held wrong by Hardy were found to be accurate. Hardy then declared, "I have never met Ramanujan&#39;s equal. I can compare him with Euler and Jacobi." That is the greatest compliment one can pay a mathematician. Euler and Jacobi were among the greatest mathematicians the world has seen. Their theorems and results are made use of on a daily basis around the world and a vast body of knowledge has been founded around their work.</p>
<p>Leonhard Euler (1707-1783) was a Swiss mathematician and physicist. He made brilliant contributions to infinitesimal calculus and graph theory. He is known for his work in Mechanics, Fluid Dynamics, Optics and Astronomy. Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi (1804- 1851) was a brilliant German mathematician. He is known for Jacobi&#39;s elliptic functions, Jacobian and Jacobi Identity.</p>
<p>Hardy meanwhile, undertook the task of teaching Ramanujan contemporary methods of mathematics, including providing proof for anything that is claimed. To a westerner, this seemed to be lacking in Ramanujan&#39;s work so far. He depended on his intuition and inspiration</p>
<p>- "Goddess wrote this equation in my dream. It just came to me." How far</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Cambridge // 75</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>this is true is still a matter of debate. To this extent, Ramanujan became Hardy&#39;s student. Otherwise, Hardy treated him as a peer and equal.</p>
<p>Hardy is said to have stated: "I did not invent him. He invented himself." Ramanujan was not only truly unique and original; he also had no equal in the type of mathematics he dealt with. He had a great insight for Form in mathematics. Had he appeared a century before he would have really become an Euler, Gauss or Jacobi; those were the days for Formal Mathematics.</p>
<p>The joint work of Hardy and Ramanujan yielded many papers. Their first one was presented to the London Mathematical Society, which Hardy visited regularly. The shy and reticent Ramanujan however did not attend this meeting. He also undertook work on "Modular Equations and Approximations to  ".</p>
<p>Story of </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> is known to every student who has studied some mathematics. It is constant and is equal to the circumference of a circle divided by its diameter and has a numerical value equal to 3.14159 correct to 5 decimal places.</p>
<p>The term has a deeper significance than being just the ratio of circumference to diameter of a circle. It appears in many mathematical expressions. In addition, it frequently appears in formulas in physics and engineering.</p>
<p>Mathematicians have engaged themselves ceaselessly in trying to determine a better approximation for it. Egyptians had one approximation in 2500BC itself. Then various Indian mathematicians</p>
<p>-Yajnavalkya, Aryabhata and Madhava improved upon its value.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Ramanujan was fascinated with  from his school days. In 1910 he developed a series expansion for it in the following form.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>76 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>1 2 2 </p>
<p>k 0</p>
<p>  9801</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>4<i>k </i>! 1103  26390<i>k k </i>! 4 3964<i>k</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Each term in this expansion improves the value of  . This expression has inspired many enthusiasts to refine the value of . Emergence of computers has been a boon in this task. In 1989 Chudnowski brothers used a variation of Ramanujan&#39;s formula -</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p></p>
<p>1  12</p>
<p> k 0</p>
<p>1 k</p>
<p>6<i>k </i>! 13591409  545140134<i>k</i></p>
<p>3 3<i>k </i> <u>3</u></p>
<p>3<i>k </i>! <i>k </i>! 640320 2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>and were able to calculate its value to 1 billion places. In 2009 scientists in Japan used T2K open computer to calculate to 2.6 trillion digits, a task that took 73 hours. The present record seems to be due to Alexander J Yee and Shigeru Kondo in Japan who have calculated it to 10 trillion places in October 2011.</p>
<p>Coping in Cambridge</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Another aspect of Ramanujan&#39;s life in England however, did not go very well in the beginning. The new surroundings came as a considerable shock to this reticent genius. It took the conservative Brahmin considerable time to tune himself to the culture and the milieu. Out went sambar and rasam served on a banana leaf. Now, it was plates, spoons, fork and knives. In spite of some training before he left India, the English dress was an issue; so were the shoes. It is said that he sent his mother a photograph of himself with a suit and a new hairstyle (tuft gone). Komalatammal could hardly recognise her son!</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Cambridge // 77</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>From the notes of</p>
<p>S. R. Ranganthan (noted for his contribution to Library Science) it is seen that Ramanujan had been made to wear a turban in Cambridge, which he disliked. Perhaps he removed it eventually. Further, it seemed his tuft could have been spared. In fact, Ranganathan had his while in England. Then Ramanujan went to the extent of not carrying his dhoti to Cambridge. He would have been happier if he had. Today, this is hardly a problem in England; one can buy any type of dhoti. But those days were different.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 23: Ramanujan in a suit</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The English accent was no less a problem. His facial mannerisms and hand gestures were hard for his colleagues to follow. When he nodded his head in approval, they took it for a refusal! Having been accustomed to perennial summers in Chennai, the temperamental English weather with its cold winters, fog patches and gloomy spells, gave Ramanujan a hard time.</p>
<p>Sleeping well was also an issue. Having been accustomed to sleeping on the floor, the fine art of English bed making with its elaborate linen was new to him. The eminent statistician P. C. Mahalanobis (1893-1972, studied in Cambridge. He later became a FRS and established the Indian Statistical Institute. He is known for Mahalanobis distance, a statistical measure. He contributed to the design of large scale sample survey and was involved in the Five Year Plans in India.) was Ramanujan&#39;s friend and peer at</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>78 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Cambridge. Once he visited him on a cold day. Ramanujan sat close to the fire and seemed uncomfortable. Mahalanobis wondered how he managed the nights and went straight to his bedroom. There he found a neat bed with a number of blankets all arranged and tucked under a bed spread. He sensed something.</p>
<p>"How do you sleep, Ramanujan?"</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>"I put on my overcoat and wrap myself in a shawl. Still I shiver."</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Then Mahalanobis calmly removed the bedspread and loosened the blankets.</p>
<p>"You sleep on the mattress and cover yourself with these blankets.</p>
<p>That should make you comfortable."</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Ramanujan was touched and became a close friend of Mahalanobis. They had breakfast at times and used take walks together. During these walks Ramanujan would speak endlessly of philosophical questions. Theory of Reality (mentioned before) is one such. Mahalanobis remarks "He seemed to have been perhaps emotionally more interested in his philosophical ideas than in his mathematical work. He spoke with such enthusiasm about the philosophical questions that sometimes I felt he would have been better pleased to have succeeded in establishing his philosophical theories than in supplying rigorous proofs of his mathematical conjectures."</p>
<p>His other friends at Cambridge included C.D. Deshmukh who became a minister in the Indian cabinet (was also the first Indian to be appointed as the governor of the Reserve Bank) and the mathematician K. Ananda Rao.</p>
<p>Many of his friends also believed that Ramanujan was more a philosopher than a mathematician. This is also echoed in an attempt to invoke him after his death. In 1934 Krishnaswami Iyengar used</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Cambridge // 79</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>an Ouja board to do it and it is said he was successful. When asked whether he continued his mathematics the reply was "No, all interest in mathematics dropped out after crossing over. I am now studying Vishnu Sahasranama." Then he was asked about some of the numbers he had written in his third notebook. He replied, "I do not remember it. Please bring the book same time next week." This was also carried out. He was invoked next week and he asked that the pages be turned slowly. The reply now was "I now remember. I was working on Mock-Theta function." It is indeed difficult to believe all this. However, it indicates that the ones that carried out this experiment believed that Ramanujan placed religion and philosophy above mathematics.</p>
<p>It appears his eyes spoke for him. People have said that the glow in his eyes captivated anybody. Mahalanobis describes Ramanujan as "shy, quiet disposition, dignified bearing and pleasant manners. His bright eyes and gentle face with a friendly smile are vivid in my mind." He listened to others carefully, but preferred to remain silent. Whenever he spoke he did so frankly but briefly. When he spoke to friends or small groups he expounded his ideas and philosophy with great enthusiasm.</p>
<p>Vegetarian food</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Ramanujan was not merely a Hindu but a hardcore Brahmin, who had strict dietary requirements. Besides meat, eggs, poultry and seafood, his diet excluded cheese, onions and garlic, too. Tomato was banned; mushroom was definitely out. Back in the early twentieth century, the practice of such vegetarianism was not easy. There was neither the luxury of spice shops nor curry houses, as we see in England today. Not many people crossed the seas those days.</p>
<p>Obviously for him, among the numerous hardships he faced, food was the biggest problem. As a devout Iyengar, sharing the table with others at the Hall or elsewhere was ruled out. He could not bear</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>80 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>the sight of chicken, beef and lamb being eaten. He had to cook his own meals. Luckily, his apartment had a kitchenette with a gas stove. Almost invariably, he would make rasam and sambar with potatoes and other vegetables; often in large batches to last him a week. The groceries required and fruits were not easily available. His mentor in India, Narayana Iyer and his mother would send him tamarind, rice powder and other ingredients packed in tins. Once he had an oversupply of these and asked his people to stop sending Indian groceries.</p>
<p>According to his wife, Janaki Ammal, he felt very jubilant when Kasturiranga Iyengar, the editor of the Hindu, visited him and ate the pongal he had cooked.</p>
<p>Once during the war time, Ramanujan visited London. It is said that the landlady offered him ovaltine to drink. After drinking it, Ramanujan happened to look at the tin that contained it. Among the ingredients listed was "powdered egg". This agitated him. At once he packed his clothing and ran out to the Liverpool train station to get back to Cambridge. As he waited at the station, the place was heavily bombed and he had enormous difficulty in catching a train. In a letter to the landlady he attributed this difficulty to the sin he had committed by eating eggs!</p>
<p>Surviving wartime hardships</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>As had been expected for almost a year, the First World War broke out in Europe in 1914; England too declared war. It has also been called the Great War. Cambridge did suffer; its peace and academic atmosphere were shaken. Army camps were set up all over the country and the hospital at Trinity was taken over by the military. Most of the staff and professors volunteered to help the soldiers. Cambridge itself had become a training camp. Littlewood was later recruited into the army and had to leave Cambridge; still he continued with his research in mathematics but of a different</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Cambridge // 81</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>kind. Hardy too registered for service but was found ‘unfit’. Luckily for Ramanujan he stayed back in Cambridge.</p>
<p>The battle of Marne took place near Paris in September 1914. The Germans suffered a defeat. As the news spread Ramanujan&#39;s mother was obviously concerned about his safety. "War is taking place far away from Cambridge in a neighbouring country. I am in no danger," Ramanujan wrote back. However, that was far from truth. Perhaps the mother was relieved.</p>
<p>For Ramanujan however, war meant nothing. He did not have to take part in it or any of the tasks associated with it. He continued his research, contributing many significant papers during this period. By 1915, nine of them had appeared in journals, five of them were in the English ones. His Cambridge tenure, which was initially for two years, was extended. He had the support of his mentors and the university. His scholarship was renewed.</p>
<p>Continued Fractions</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Once, Mahalanobis visited Ramanujan to have lunch with him. He was armed with the latest issue of The Strand magazine, a monthly. Ramanujan was frying something for lunch. Mahalanobis came across a curious puzzle thrown open to the readers -</p>
<p>Someone stood near a Belgian&#39;s house on a street in the town of Louvain which had anywhere between 50 and 500 houses which had been numbered continuously from left to right. The Belgian house was such that the sum of the numbers of the house to the left of it equaled that of the houses to the right. Find out the number of the Belgian house.</p>
<p>While Mahalanobis worked out the problem by trial and error finally coming up with the correct answer. Then he shouted,</p>
<p>"Ramanujan, here is a problem for you."</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>82 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>"Please tell me."</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Mahalanobis read out the problem.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>"Please take down the solution"</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Ramanujan at once dictated a solution using continued fractions to crack the riddle. His solution was a general one in that it answered the entire class of such problems. When probed about his strategy and methods, he quipped, "It just came to me!"</p>
<p>The problem can be illustrated as below for a street with 288 houses.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The answer is 204. It can be seen that 1+2+3+4+……….. 203 = 205+206+………+288.</p>
<p>Ramanujan was quick to recognize that the problem could be solved using what are known as Continued Fractions. Ramanujan did pioneering work on this.</p>
<p>Application of Continued Fractions</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Considering the problem posed in the Strand newspaper, the house numbers are clearly in an Arithmetic Progression whose sum can easily be written.</p>
<p>Let M be the number of houses on the street and N be the number of the Belgian house. The sum of house numbers to the left</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Cambridge // 83</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>of the house is the sum of an Arithmetic Progression with beginning with 1 and ending with N – 1. This is given by</p>
<p>N (N 1) 2</p>
<p>Similarly, the sum to the right is given by</p>
<p><i> M </i>(<i>M </i> 1)  <i>M </i>(<i>M </i> 1) 2 2</p>
<p>We have</p>
<p><i>N </i>(<i>N </i>1)  <i>M </i>(<i>M </i> 1)  <i>N </i>(<i>N </i> 1) 2 2 2</p>
<p>This gives the equation,</p>
<p>2<i>M </i>1 2  2 2<i>N </i>2  1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>If we substitute X = 2M + 1 and Y = 2N, this equation gives,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>X </i>2  2<i>Y </i>2  1</p>
<p>This equation has solutions like (1,1), (3,2), (7,5), (17,12), …</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Numbers 1, 3, 7, 17,… are the numerators of a continued fraction while 1,2,5,12 are the denominators. Refer to part 2 for details.</p>
<p>Intuition vs. Rigorous Method</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>That was the way his genius worked. It was intuition and insight that Ramanujan relied upon. To Hardy and his associates at Cambridge, it was this dependence on intuition, ignoring the rigorous mathematical methods that bogged down Ramanujan&#39;s progress. It appeared that his work with Zeta Functions was misguided because of this very</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>84 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>approach. At one point of time, Ramanujan even attempted to prove some of his theorems, using the new ways he learnt from Hardy.</p>
<p>Hardy however, was also careful not to draw Ramanujan completely to the new methods. Sometimes he felt "with modern methods of mathematics, he would have been just an academic but not the genius." Clearly, it was his intuition that shaped his greatness though it also made him err at times. In the words of Littlewood,</p>
<p>"A proper use of Ramanujan would be to leave him to his intuition and to his daring, penetrating conjectures since such persons are few and far between. The proof and verification is the work for a technician in mathematics."</p>
<p>In many ways this has become true. Professors and scholars today are proving some of the theorems that Ramanujan has given with his extra-ordinary insight.</p>
<p>There is a debate among mathematicians - Was Ramanujan aware of the western system of rigorous proof ? Did he depend on his intuition entirely? Each school of thought has its own evidence. Bruce Berndt is a scholar and a professor who has studied Ramanujan thoroughly. According to him, there are three main reasons why Ramanujan did not provide proofs for his theorems. First, he was probably influenced by the style of Carr (whose book he adored during his school days) who merely listed the theorems in his book. Second, Ramanujan used a slate to work out his theorems and transferred only the results in his notebooks. To write out all the proof on paper would have been prohibitively expensive for him (when food itself is a problem, how can I find money for paper? I may require about four reams of paper every month). Third, He may have felt that there is no reason to provide proofs. He was not contemplating publishing his results during his notebook days. However, Berndt states, "As Ramanujan himself was aware, some of his arguments were not rigorous</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Cambridge // 85</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>by contemporary standards. Nevertheless, despite his lack of rigour at times, Ramanujan doubtless thought and devised proofs l ike any other mathematician, but with insights that surpass all but a few of the greatest mathematicians"</p>
<p>Hardy graded himself and his peers. Ramanujan scored a perfect centum (100), while Hilbert and Littlewood got 80 and 30 respectively. Hardy was his own harshest critic, rating himself the lowest at 25. "Ramanujan is the best mathematician I have seen and in some ways the most remarkable one I have ever known," he stated.</p>
<p>Ramanujan wrote regularly to his mother, always enquiring after the others. Once he wrote to his father suggesting that the house should be kept clean and that the drainage should not be allowed to run as usual. He even sent books to his brothers. He had made up his mind to return to India when he had completed a year and a half. But it was his mother that persuaded him to complete his Masters before returning! She had her own master plan for her son. In fact a master&#39;s was the highest degree that was awarded by Cambridge those days. A degree from the elite institution was prestigious indeed and Ramanujan stayed on. He wrote to Hardy,</p>
<p>"It is true that I promised my mother that I was going home at the end of 2 years; I wrote them several letters 1 ½ years ago that I was coming over there for the long vacation; but I had many letters of protest from my mother to the effect that I ought not come to India till I took my M.A. degree. So I gave up the idea of going there."</p>
<p>His fame had spread among the residents of Cambridge. People came to visit him often. Having overcome his initial shyness and inhibitions, Ramanujan too was keen to venture out of his comfort zone and see the world outside. London was one of his favourite destinations. He used to visit the Zoo and the British Museum apart from attending the theatre on a few rare occasions. He enjoyed his</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>86 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>freedom. He had no official duties to perform, except to continue his research.</p>
<p>In 1915, he changed his accommodation. He now moved to the Staircase D at the Bishop Hostel. It was here that his paper on Highly Composite Numbers appeared in Proceedings of London Mathematical Society. The paper shows Ramanujan&#39;s extra-ordinary insight. On the strength of this piece of research alone, Cambridge University awarded him a B.A. degree. What an honour and remarkable achievement for someone who could not clear any college examinations back in India!</p>
<p>Highly Composite Numbers</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>We know Prime Numbers as those, which are divisible by themselves and of course by 1. Examples are 3, 5, 7, 11, 13 etc. Composite Numbers are those, which are divisible by other numbers. Examples are as follows -</p>
<p>4 is divisible by 4, 2 and 1</p>
<p>6 is divisible by 6, 3, 2 and 1.</p>
<p>The examples of Composite Numbers are 4, 6, 8, 10, 15, 16 etc.</p>
<p>A composite number can be expressed as</p>
<p>N  2a  3b  5c  7d  px where p is the final term and x is its power. Ramanujan showed that always a > b > c > d >…..</p>
<p>He also showed that x is always equal to 1. Exceptions are 4 = 22</p>
<p>and 36 = 22  32.</p>
<p>Ramanujan also defined what are called Highly Composite Numbers to mean that they have a large number of factors. For instance</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Cambridge // 87</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>number 24 has eight factors - 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12 and 24. None of the numbers less than 24 has so many factors. Hence 24 is a Highly Composite Number. Ramanujan had listed such highly composite numbers well before moving to Cambridge.</p>
<p>Sensitive and eccentric</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>A very strange incident occurred in 1916. Ramanujan had a friend called Chatterji. He invited Chatterji and his fiancée Ila for dinner at his place. He would cook and showcase his domestic prowess. The menu for the occasion was rice and rasam. The pair came along with another girl Mrilani. Dinner was served. The guests ate rice and rasam. Then, as is customary among good hosts, Ramanujan offered a second helping. They did accept the offer. Ramanujan would not stop at this. He forced them to have the third serve. Chatterji did not mind, but the ladies refused. Maybe it was too much for them. Surprisingly, Ramanujan went out of the room and did not come back. The guests waited for a while; there was no trace of the host. Then they began to search. They learnt from the porter of the college that Ramanujan had called for a taxi and gone away.</p>
<p>Chatterji could not understand where Ramanujan had gone. Hardy was informed of his disappearance. He too was perplexed and began to search for Ramanujan. Five days later, Mahalanobis received a telegram - "I am in Oxford (about 80 miles away from Cambridge) and would like to come back. Please send me 5 pounds." Mahalabonis did not have the required money and he approached Hardy. The money was sent and Ramanujan returned. When Hardy enquired why he had disappeared suddenly, he replied "The ladies refused to eat my rasam for the third time. I was hurt and did not want to enter the apartment when they were present."</p>
<p>There are many such instances in his life. Even as a child he was known to be extremely sensitive, wanting everything his way.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>88 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The Hall and Ramanujan</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The Hall in Trinity College, University of Cambridge is not just a place where the teachers and students eat. It is a place where charming intellectual exchange took place. Frequented in the past by legends such as Newton, Dryden, Byron, Tennyson, Thackeray and Bacon, the Hall was often the most important venue for good-humored camaraderie as the inmates shared ideas and swapped yarns. Ramanujan may have wanted to dine at this stately Hall, but his dietary restrictions and food habits forbade him from doing so. Because of this, he was certainly deprived of a great opportunity to interact with peers. During Ramanujan&#39;s time, Hardy, Russell and others would discuss issues of interest and importance. Ramanujan unfortunately, missed all this.</p>
<p>Fig 24: The Hall</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>As well, his was not an outgoing personality. He would rather shut himself in, poring over his numbers. Sports and leisure meant nothing to him. He would also not attend the meetings at the Royal Society even on days when his own work was presented and discussed. In those days of war and winter Cambridge was no more than a prison for him.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Cambridge // 89</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Partitions</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Partitions or Partition function was one of the areas where Ramanujan made great strides. The concept of partitions could be explained as follows.</p>
<p>Consider the number 3. It can be expressed as (1+1+1), (1+2) or (3). We say that partition function for 3 is 3 or p (3)=3. Similarly the number 4 can be expressed as (1+1+1+1), (1+3), (1+1+2) , (2+2)</p>
<p>or (4). So p (4)=5</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>When the given number is small partitions can be written down as a matter of fact. For example,</p>
<p>p (0) = 1, (0)</p>
<p>p (1) = 1, (1)</p>
<p>p (2) = 2, (2, 1+1)</p>
<p>p (3) = 3, (3, 2+1, 1+1+1)</p>
<p>p (4) = 5, (4, 3+1, 2+2, 2+1+1, 1+1+1+1).</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Similarly,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>p (5) = 7, p (6) = 11, p (7) = 15, p (8) = 22.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>As the given integer increases the partition function also increases, seemingly at an undetermined rate. See for example,</p>
<p>p (9) = 30, p (10) = 42.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The challenge is to obtain an expression or a formula for the partition function so that one does not have to write down the partitions in order to determine how many there are for a given number.</p>
<p>Euler (1707-1783)</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Euler, one of the greatest mathematicians that history has seen seems to be the first to attempt to develop a formula for partition function. He started out with a series of the form</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>90 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>f x </i> 1 <i>p </i>1 <i>x</i>1  <i>p </i>2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>x</i>2  <i>p </i>3</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>x</i>3  <i>p n xn</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>In the above equation p (1) is the partition function for 1, p (2) is the partition function for 2 etc. If the series is written up to 50 terms one has p (50) being the partition function for 50.</p>
<p>Euler was unable to determine these numbers. However the above formula can be twisted to yield a recursive relation as below.</p>
<p>p N  p N 1  p N  2</p>
<ul>
<li>
<p>p  N  5</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p> <i>p </i> <i>N </i>12</p>
<p>= 0</p>
<ul>
<li>
<p>p  N  7</p>
<p> p N 15</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Where N is the given number. The above series is to be truncated once one arrives at a negative argument for p, say p (-1) or p (-2).</p>
<p>If N = 8 it is seen that</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>p (8) – p (7) – p (6) + p (3) + p (1) – p (–4) – p (7) = 0</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>i.e., p(8) – 15 – 11 + 3 + 1 = 0</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>giving p(8) = 22 as required.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>It is clear that one can determine p for a given number N only if p (N – 1), p (N – 2) etc are known.</p>
<p>Ramanujan&#39;s Contribution to Partition function</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>In 1913, being interested in the issue, Ramanujan had indicated the possibility of calculating them in his letter to Hardy. It was about now that he and Hardy took the issue seriously and made substantial progress.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Cambridge // 91</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>This work seems to have stemmed from a mistake that Ramanujan had committed when he gave a series as the answer to the Partition Function.</p>
<p>The two developed what is known as the Circle method based on another famous mathematician Cauchy&#39;s theorem. This is hailed as one of the outstanding contributions of Ramanujan and Hardy. Ramanujan came up with an expression for the first term of an asympotitic series for p(n) as</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>p n </p>
<p>1  2n</p>
<p>e 3</p>
<p>4<i>n </i>3</p>
<p>According to this formula p (100) = 199, 280, 893 while the correct answer is 190, 569, 292. This is hailed as one of the big achievements of Ramanujan and Hardy. They were helped in this venture by MacMahon who had calculated partitions for numbers up to 200. This was a big help in checking out the theory.</p>
<p>Much work has taken place in this area after Ramanujan&#39;s death.</p>
<p>Rigorous proof for these came in 1938.</p>
<p>Ken Ono&#39;s Breakthrough</p>
<p>Partitions have held the interest of mathematicians even in 2012. At the time of writing this book there is the news that Ken Ono and his associates (Ken Ono, Amanda Folsom, & Zach Kent (2011). l-adic properties of the partition function, American Institute of Mathematics.) have come up with an exact formula for Partition Function. Some details of their contribution are outside the scope of this book. Their work is based on the self-similarity noticed in the partition function and an appreciation of the rich structure therein. It is as if the Partition function follow a similarity as observed in Fractal Mechanics, where one observes the same structure on a macroscopic as well as a microscopic scale. A very good account of these developments is available in Youtube especially by Tanton.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>92 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>It may be pointed out that a computer can churn out the Partitions for any number that is not too large if Euler&#39;s recursive relation is programmed. In fact, it is easily done without much expertise. However, mathematicians are interested in writing what are called "Closed Form" solutions, which may or may not need a computer to evaluate.</p>
<p>Details of Ramanujan&#39;s contribution to Partitions and of his conjectures are given in part 2 of the book.</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>// 93</p>
<p>Health Deteriorates</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Alone and homesick</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Ramanujan&#39;s routine in Cambridge was highly irregular and unpredictable. There were days when he worked non-stop for 30 hours and rested for the next 20. Mathematics became an all- consuming passion, with little time for anything else. He is not alone in this. It is very true of many trailblazing artists, scientists, thinkers and high achievers.</p>
<p>While in England, Ramanujan had to forego many simple comforts he had enjoyed back home. He missed his extended family, particularly his wife, mother and grandmother who prepared excellent food of his liking, who were there in times of need, who took care of him and who calmed him when he got agitated. He also missed the ambience of Kumbakonam and Chennai. Beyond all these, it was the temple where he could find solace and refuge. That was just not there! It appears that he had sacrificed a lot in favour of the intellectual company of Hardy and others. Was the Cambridge experience ultimately fulfilling? To a great extent, yes.</p>
<p>But the altered circumstances ultimately took its toll on his fragile health. The lack of central heating posed an enormous health risk not just to Ramanujan, but to fellow Indians as well, who had to brave Britain&#39;s chilly winters. Nutritional issues cropped up. Though</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>94 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>food was plentifully available, with abundant dairy and fresh produce, his restricted lifestyle meant that Ramanujan had to be on his own. The basic food he prepared was no comparison to the elaborate meals, served to him back in India. For him, cooking was clearly a huge distraction from his main goal - mathematics, a drain on his time and intellectual resources. At times he lived on mere rice, salt and lemon juice. Sadly, it brought about his breakdown.</p>
<p>No wonder, he lamented to Janaki Ammal later, "If only you had come with me to England, perhaps I would not have fallen ill." Despite his unswerving determination, illness eventually got the better of him. The reasons for his infirmity were manifold - stress, overwork, and malnourishment.</p>
<p>By 1917, Cambridge was deserted because of war. Ramanujan fell ill with suspected tuberculosis and admitted to a nursing home near Trinity. His family in India was informed. It was felt that he should be removed to India where he might enjoy a warmer climate. But most of the specialist doctors in India were on war duty. In addition he was not fit to take up a sea voyage. It was then decided to keep him in England itself for some more time.</p>
<p>He was moved back to the Bishop Hostel. It appears that Hardy himself nursed the ailing mathematician. Within a span of</p>
<p>2 years, Ramanujan visited 8 doctors and 5 hospitals. Doctors suspected gastric ulcer, hydrocele (for which he had been operated before) or lead poisoning. Ramanujan was in the habit of cooking rasam and sambar in a brass vessel, which over time lost the polish on it. Sometimes he also cooked in the food cans. It is speculated that these may have caused lead poisoning (this theory has been dismissed sometimes). He was advised bed rest, plenty of nutritious food and exercise. After being moved around here and there, he was finally admitted to Matlock, a sanatorium. One of his letters</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Health Deteriorates // 95</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>to Hardy from here reveals a curious fact. It appears Ramanujan&#39;s room was heated only for a few days upon his arrival at the nursing home. Hardy had instructed the authorities (so it is said) that he be provided heating when he did any serious mathematical work. This upset Ramanujan to the extent that he never asked for heating even when he did serious mathematics. Instead he went to the bathroom which was heated and did his work!</p>
<p>&#39;My house has not written to me&#39;</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>While he achieved remarkable success, within a short lifespan, biographers believe that there are often physical needs that the mind does not know or admit. Man does not live by mathematics alone. Something troubled him all through his stay in Cambridge. He would not share his innermost thoughts with anyone. Hardy had maintained a casual relationship with him and assumed that the Indian scholar was reasonably contented. Only later, did he learn what was going on. Ramanujan confided: "My house has not written to me." By house he meant his wife (and mother perhaps).</p>
<p>Ramanujan had written several letters home including some to his wife, Janaki Ammal. Strangely, she never replied. The reason was very simple. His mother suppressed his letters and never mailed those Janaki Ammal wrote. The young wife too was distressed by Ramanujan&#39;s apparent apathy. She had often sought money but received no reply. Once, she wrote a letter asking Ramanujan to get her to Cambridge and managed to put it into his provisions parcel. Sadly, it fell into wrong hands. Komalatammal threw it away.</p>
<p>The relationship between mother in law and daughter in law was very typical of the time - one of resentment and animosity. Left under the care of a jealous mother in law, young Janaki Ammal had to endure a lot and her situation showed no signs of improvement. Her circumstances changed when Janaki Ammal&#39;s brother got engaged.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>96 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>She left for Karachi (now in Pakistan) to attend the wedding and never returned to Chennai.</p>
<p>From Karachi, she wrote letters, which finally did reach Ramanujan. She requested money and Ramanujan sent it. However, these letters were very formal.</p>
<p>Ramanujan writes to Hardy,</p>
<p>".....It is not true that I am getting letters from my wife or brothers-in-law or anybody. I had only very formal letters from my wife just explaining to me why she had to leave my home and asking me why my mother should trouble her by [not] speaking to her when they met anywhere by chance. When I do not know the whereabouts of my wife my mother&#39;s grievance is that I have left my wife in some secret place somewhere in India and that she is waiting for me frequently to come to that place without my mother&#39;s knowledge and that I am listening to her words all the time "</p>
<p>Where was Ramanujan&#39;s father as the saga unfolded? Despite his failing eyesight, it appears he had understood Janaki Ammal&#39;s plight and intervened on her behalf. But Komalatammal controlled the household. These unsavoury happenings seem to have disgusted Ramanujan, who stopped writing to both wife and mother. Yet distance prevented him from taking any meaningful action. Stressed and embittered, in some sense he cut himself from his own family. This made him mentally ill as well; in reality he was truly isolated - cut off from England and from Hardy too (except mathematically).</p>
<p>By 1917, Hardy was already a world figure with his own priorities and interests. He could not devote himself to Ramanujan all the time. Of course, he collaborated with Ramanujan in mathematics but could not fully understand him. Besides academic interests, the two were poles apart in many respects. Thus, east remained east; west remained west. For instance, Hardy was oblivious of Ramanujan&#39;s faith</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Health Deteriorates // 97</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>in God and could not appreciate his personality fully. The devout Hindu considered his brilliance and profound insight as a divine gift. He often claimed that Goddess Namagiri appeared in his dreams and wrote theorems and equations for him. Ramanujan even went to the extent of saying "Equations are products of God&#39;s mind." Hardy would not subscribe to Ramanujan&#39;s beliefs. To him, mathematics was a conscious and logical product of human mind, methodically following a rigid set of rules and principles.</p>
<p>Laurels and Attempted Suicide</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Hardy felt that it was necessary that Ramanujan should be honoured for his service to mathematics. In 1916 he tried to make him a Fellow of the Trinity College. There were problems. Hardy was in the company of Bertrand Russell who was having a tough time with the system. Not one of Hardy&#39;s recommendations did come through. Further, Ramanujan was a dark skinned Indian. Racism played its part. He was not voted to be a fellow. However, December 6, 1917 was a remarkable day for Ramanujan. Hardy was successful in getting him admitted to the London Mathematical Society. Following this, Hardy proposed him for a fellowship of the Royal society.</p>
<p>However, a very sad event took place soon after. In February 1918, racked by inner turmoil, the lonely and despondent Ramanujan threw himself in front of a running train at one of the stations in London (believed to be the Marble Arch station). Thankfully, the alert guard pulled the chain, averting a colossal tragedy. Scotland Yard arrested the Indian mathematician. Hardy was summoned to the police station. He told the officer that Ramanujan was a Fellow of the Royal Society and could not be arrested. He was released. Naturally Hardy asked why he had taken such a drastic step. The reply was "I did so because I am disgusted. Anyway, I am going to die."</p>
<p>Evidently, Ramanujan was never at peace. In childhood and youth he suffered poverty and failure in examinations. Now he was a recognized genius but suffered ill health and loneliness.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>98 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Suspecting that Ramanujan&#39;s illustrious career would soon be curtailed by ill health, Hardy immediately wrote to the Royal Society to speed up the fellowship process. The nomination had the support of all leading mathematicians of the time. It was signed by eleven mathematicians including Hobson and Baker (who had dismissed Ramanujan outright only a few years before). The letter had stated,</p>
<p>"Distinguished as a pure mathematician, particularly for his investigations in elliptic functions and theory of numbers. Author of the following papers amongst others. ……"</p>
<p>Hardy informed the president of the society the Nobel Laureate</p>
<p>J. J. Thompson (who discovered the electron) why he was rushing Ramanujan&#39;s nomination. His health was poor. The society if fails to award him the fellowship might later regret its action. It was also necessary to make him feel that he is a success. In the meeting of the Royal society that took place in January, 1918 there were 104 nominations including that of Ramanujan. Only a few were to be elected as fellows. Naturally, he (and fourteen others) was accepted and Ramanujan was formally named Fellow of Royal society, FRS. He was the second Indian to receive this honor (the first one being Ardaseer Cursetjee in 1841 for ship building and engineering). It is also special that he obtained the fellowship in the very first attempt. Niels Bohr is another scientist who shares this honour.</p>
<p>Quite clearly, this marked the pinnacle of his career. Recognition by the Society is the one of the most distinctive honours that can be bestowed upon a meritorious individual. It is usually given to great achievers, based on their lifelong work and involvement. It is to Ramanujan&#39;s credit that he reached the celebrated milestone as a young man, only 30 years old. With this, the once penniless scholar from a small rural town was finally at the Everest of Mathematics. He was truly world class now.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Health Deteriorates // 99</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Another attempt was made by Hardy to procure Ramanujan the fellowship of Trinity College. Again it was not a smooth sail. One of the members raised the objection that Ramanujan was mentally sick; he had attempted suicide. But a strong point in his favour was that he was already a FRS. It would have been ridiculous if he were denied the Trinity Fellowship. It was decided to admit him as a fellow. This meant that he would receive an honorarium of 250 pounds a year. Ramanujan felt embarrassed and worried. He asked Hardy,</p>
<p>"Do I deserve it? How do I accept it in this health?"</p>
<p>"You have done enough already. In fact, what you have done deserves more than this. It is given so that you can live in comfort. You can choose to stay in India or here. There is no obligation that you carry out further research. You can spend it on your travel if you like. "</p>
<p>Ramanujan requested that 50 pounds of this sum go to his parents. Whatever remained after his travel expenses (if at all he travelled) was to be distributed as charity to needy students. Komalatammal was furious at the suggestion - "It is time you took care of your people and family first", she declared.</p>
<p>Homeward Bound</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>His Cambridge sojourn had left Ramanujan weak and emaciated. His health had deteriorated considerably. One of his acquaintances in London, Ramalingam was pained to find him in this regrettable plight. His doctor had prescribed a healthy diet - eggs on toast and tea for breakfast, rice, chilies, mustard, cucumber and lemon peas for lunch. These however, seemed "awful" to Ramanujan, who stubbornly continued his preferred South Indian vegetarian meals. Sadly, the erudite scholar&#39;s adamant ways cost him dearly.</p>
<p>When the war ended in 1918, Ramanujan considered returning home to India. As a mathematician, he had achieved his goals. He had written 20 papers in 4 years. Hardy felt he should return to India but visit Cambridge frequently. Preparation for his departure started.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>100 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1729</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Ramanujan was now at a nursing home in Putney in London</p>
<p>and was frequently visited by Hardy. The two would discuss mathematics as always. One day, Hardy started the conversation,</p>
<p>"The number of my taxi-cab was 1729. It seemed to be a rather dull number!"</p>
<p>Ramanujan promptly shot back,</p>
<p>"No Hardy that is a very, very interesting number. It is the smallest number which can be expressed as a sum of two cubes in two different ways."</p>
<p>Hardy was taken by surprise. How could he come up with this?</p>
<p>What Ramanujan meant was</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>123 13  103  93  1729</p>
<p>These numbers are now known as Taxi Numbers or Hardy- Ramanujan numbers. Curiously, this is an incident in Ramanujan&#39;s life that most people remember and appreciate. 1729 has now become synonymous with the humble genius. Commonly people are surprised how Ramanujan was able to come out with this. It is attributed to his sheer genius. However, it is now clear that he had already worked out this combination of numbers before and had recorded this in his notebooks.</p>
<p>The other Taxi numbers that have been found are</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>4104  163  23  153  93</p>
<p>13832  243  23  203 183</p>
<p>20683  273 103  243  193</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>An extended discussion of Taxi Numbers can be found in Part 2 of the book.</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>// 101</p>
<p>Back in India</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fame and Name</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Now that Ramanujan was a world figure, there was no problem in finding recognition in India. The University of Madras offered him a professorship with a salary of 400 rupees a month. This was a princely sum in the early twentieth century. Ramanujan replied: "I will accept the offer when my health improves."</p>
<p>With a trunk full of papers, books and a box of raisins for his brothers, Ramanujan boarded ship Nagoya bound for Bombay (now Mumbai).</p>
<p>Where is She?</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>"Where is she?" That was the first question Ramanujan asked as he disembarked in Mumbai on March 27, 1919. His mother and brother Lakshmi Narasimhan were there to receive him. There was drama at the port. Komalatammal was shaken by Ramanujan&#39;s attitude.</p>
<p>"Who is that she?" the mother questioned. Ramanujan of course referred to his wife Janaki Ammal. Mother was surprised and angry. "We do not know where she is," she answered.</p>
<p>In reality the mother in law and the daughter in law had not communicated for more than a year. Komalatammal did not know</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>102 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>where Janaki Ammal was; she could have been in Rajendram, her mother&#39;s place or in Karachi, her brother&#39;s place. Ramanujan demanded that she be brought back. His brother wrote identical letters to both the addresses. Janaki Ammal was in Rajendram; she had read about her husband&#39;s return to India in the newspapers and soon came to Chennai. What a pathetic life for Janaki Ammal!</p>
<p>The genius had returned home. There was no room to celebrate. It was certain he would not live long. He was not the Ramanujan that the family had seen five years before when he left India. It was not that stout, graceful Ramanujan. Instead "He was just a bag of bones", as said Janaki Ammal later. Mother had plans that he be taken to Rameswaram (a pilgrim centre at the southern tip of India) to perform a purification ceremony. This would absolve him of the sin of having crossed the seas and lived abroad. But it was a long and arduous journey of more than 500 miles. His physical condition made the trip impossible. The idea was abandoned and the family returned to Chennai.</p>
<p>For the first time after many years, Ramanujan tasted thair saadam (yoghurt and rice) prepared by his mother. To the homesick genius, it was truly divine. "If only I had this in England, I would not have fallen sick!" he declared happily.</p>
<p>All prominent newspapers carried the news of his return. His new celebrity status ensured that nothing was wanting in his life anymore, except health. Many organizations offered financial support. Patrons were very keen to foot his medical bills.</p>
<p>Ramanujan and Janaki Ammal</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>For the first time, Janaki Ammal and Ramanujan lived together, though under the watchful eyes of Komalatammal. Close to 20 years now, Janaki Ammal had finally acquired courage. She would retaliate</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Back in India // 103</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>when her mother in law chastised her. Having experienced western culture, Ramanujan too had a liberal outlook. He now drank coffee! His tuft had gone! He would contradict his mother and go against her wishes.</p>
<p>When he had to change his sacred thread (the one that every Brahmin wears across his shoulders and change once a year), his mother demanded that Ramanujan go alone to the temple. But, to her surprise, he insisted that Janaki Ammal should accompany him and she did so. He had saved up 5000 rupees to buy a gold belt and earrings for her. Behind the superior intellect and compulsive workaholic lay hidden a warm and compassionate soul; Maths may have been his obsession, but he did love Janaki Ammal. It appears from his gestures that he desperately sought to bond with her, as any typical husband would.</p>
<p>She has said,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>"He returned from England only to die, as the saying goes. I was with him throughout this period without a break. He was only skin and bones and complained of pain. In spite of it he was always busy doing mathematics. That evidently helped him to forget the pain. He was uniformly kind to me. While he conversed, he was full of wit and humor. One day he confided in me that he might not live beyond thirty five and asked me to meet the event with courage and fortitude. He was well looked after by his friends. He often used to repeat his gratitude to all those who had helped him in his life."</p>
<p>His wit was remarkable, even in front of his death. He told his wife that "Tanjavur" can be split as "Tan Sav ur" meaning that he was expected to die there. It may be noted that "savu" means death. He was finally put in a house in Chetput in Madras. He punned it as "chat pat" meaning he will be crushed.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>104 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Summer heat in Chennai was unbearable. The family moved Ramanujan to Kodumudi, another temple town on the banks of Cauveri near Erode. After two months another change of place was felt necessary. The family returned to Kumbakonam. Here Ramanujan caught up with some of his old friends and acquaintances. Dr Chandrasekhara Iyer, a general physician and a Tuberculosis expert came from Chenani to treat him. He at once confirmed that Ramanujan suffered from Tuberculosis.</p>
<p>It is interesting that Saragapani Iyengar (one who had scored more marks in the Mathematics examination at Town High school and later gave him shelter at Chennai) visited him now. Ramanujan is reported to have told him "I have another good friend that does not want to leave me. It is Tuberculosis." At Dr. Iyer&#39;s suggestion, he was brought back to Chennai for treatment. He was placed in a house called Gometra made available by Namperumal Chetty free of cost. Other medical expenses were borne by his father Sriniavsa Iyengar, Government of Madras and University of Madras.</p>
<p>On the Deathbed</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>However by now, Dr Iyer had given up hope. Disease had reached an advanced stage and the only solution was divine intervention which did not happen this time.</p>
<p>Ramanujan had also lost the will to live. The domestic wrangles however showed no signs of abating. Mother and daughter in law remained at loggerheads. But he grew closer to his wife. He would now tolerate her intrusions when he was immersed in work. In the past he would shout at her if she disturbed him. Janaki Ammal too cooperated with him to the maximum. She nursed him with utmost care and was ready to hand him the slate to work on whenever he asked. However closer to his death, the illness completely took control over him; he grew puckish and impatient. He was put</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Back in India // 105</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>on a diet which consisted mostly of yoghurt, lime juice, orange and sometimes rasam with rice.</p>
<p>But mathematics did not stop; it followed him like his shadow. Even when death knocked on his door, Ramanujan was busy as ever, with his lifelong companions - numbers. It is said that he stopped writing anything on his slate or paper just four days before his death. His thinking however may have not stopped at all! He was absorbed with Mock Theta Function among other topics, even recording his findings in a letter to Hardy; surprisingly enough he did not mention anything regarding his declining health. It is said that he worked for almost a year and came up with 650 formulas. One of the mathematicians later remarked, "Mock Theta Functions are an achievement for his name to be held in lasting remembrance."</p>
<p>What does the horoscope say?</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Mother&#39;s anxiety mounted; what will happen of my Chinnasamy now? Can something be done to save him? At this stage, Komalathammal thought that she should consult an astrologer regarding her son&#39;s future. With an introductory letter from Prof. Seshu Iyer she met an astrologer Narayanaswamy Iyer and for him drew from memory the horoscope of her son. She did not tell him who she was, but asked,</p>
<p>"How long is he going to live?"</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The astrologer gazed at the horoscope, read it from all angles, thought for a while and said,</p>
<p>"He will attain world wise reputation and die at the height of his reputation. If he survives he will be an obscure person. Please tell me whose horoscope is this? "</p>
<p>"It is Ramanujan&#39;s." replied a trembling Komalathammal.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>106 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The astrologer was taken aback. "Was I studying the horoscope of that genius?" He said,</p>
<p>"Please do not convey this information to anyone in his family."</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>"Sir, I am the unfortunate mother of this genius. I knew all this.</p>
<p>I merely wanted a reputed astrologer such as you to check."</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Komalathammal burst into tears. As if to offer a way out the astrologer said,</p>
<p>"Maybe his wife&#39;s horoscope is good and will compensate. Do you have hers?"</p>
<p>Komalathammal drew Janaki Ammal&#39;s horoscope from memory. The astrologer compared the horoscopes and said,</p>
<p>"It is better that they live separately for some time."</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>None of these was news to Komalathammal. She herself was good in reading the horoscopes. She had already come to the same conclusion. In fact, she had asked Janaki Ammal to get back to her parent&#39;s place for some time. But Ramanujan would not allow this. Janaki Ammal had to stay with him.</p>
<p>The End</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>He made his horoscope true! His wife Janaki Ammal, parents Komalatammal and Srinivasa Iyengar and brothers and others were at his bedside, when the end came on April 20, 1920. Ramanujan was only 32. It is said that most of his Brahmin relatives did not take part in the funeral. He had crossed the seas and sinned. For them the glory he had achieved was of no concern.</p>
<p>Did the maths prodigy deserve such an untimely death? The answer is a resounding No. Tragically, it appears he could have</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Back in India // 107</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>been easily saved. A note in the diary of the attending doctor Chandrasekhara Iyer is an eye opener "If he had been allowed to follow my instructions, this double tragedy would not have taken place, ignorance of his contemporaries ... his relatives as well contributed to this. Too deep for tears". It is not known clearly what his instructions were and why they were not followed.</p>
<p>The Indian Mathematical Society, which so proudly heralded his iconic achievements in Cambridge, reported the tragic demise with a touching obituary. Hardy, who had temporarily moved to Oxford at the time of Ramanujan&#39;s death, was deeply shattered. So were a multitude of people in India, England and the world over. The entire mathematical community mourned the loss of the rare genius. Such a deep-rooted commitment to the world of numbers has rarely been seen since.</p>
<p>In 1994 Dr. Young analysed the medical records of Ramanujan and felt that his death may have been the result of hepatic amoebiasis, a parasitic infection of the liver. It seems it prevailed in Madras then. The two attacks of dysentery he suffered in his life are perhaps due to this. Cold climate in Cambridge may have caused a relapse of the infection. Had his condition been discovered earlier, Dr Young noted, it could have been treated and cured. However it is felt that it is difficult to diagnose this.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>108 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>Publishing Notebooks</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>A detailed account of the "Publication History" of the Notebooks has been given by Ranganathan. It seems Ramanujan had wished that his notebooks be printed and published. Following his death, the University of Madras had acquired them from Janaki Ammal paying her a monthly allowance or royalty of Rs. 20. There were two books when S. R. Ranganathan took up the responsibility of archiving and publishing them. Very soon he learnt that there was a third book that Ramanujan had left in Cambridge. Ranganathan travelled to Oxford to meet Hardy who had temporarily moved there from Cambridge. Hardy not only parted with the notebook but also encouraged Ranganathan to edit and publish it for wider use.</p>
<p>A reluctant University of Madras allowed Ranganathan to make three copies of each of the notebooks. Of the copies made one was sent to Hardy and the others preserved at the University along with the originals. Hardy in turn wrote a number of papers following the notebooks.</p>
<p>Ranganathan took up the task of printing the notebooks but lacked funding. Several people of repute including a chief justice, vice chancellors of universities promised funding. But none came out with money. In 1957, after a lapse of 35 years following Ramanujan&#39;s death, Tata institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai brought out a photocopy edition of the notebooks in two volumes.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Publishing Notebooks // 109</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Thanks to the admirable work of Prof. Bruce Berndt, the notebooks are available today in the printed form. Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai has brought out "A Collector&#39;s Edition of Notebooks" in 2012 during Ramanujan&#39;s 125th birth anniversary celebrations.</p>
<p>It should be pointed out that the Cambridge University wasted no time and published Ramanujan&#39;s Collected Papers in 1927.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>110 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>Lost Notebook of Ramanujan</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>There is a mystery surrounding what is famous now as “The Lost Notebook of Ramanujan.”</p>
<p>On his return to India, despite his failing health, Ramanujan had continued his obsessive tryst with numbers, methodically storing his findings in a leather box. After his death, Janaki Ammal took custody of the papers and handed them over to the University of Madras. She has told Berndt that "many of the papers were stolen by two certain people". What a loss to the mathematical world! Later, Hardy requested that these be passed on to him. The university obliged and the papers reached Cambridge. Hardy handed them over to a colleague, Watson who had shown keen interest in Ramanujan&#39;s theorems.</p>
<p>There was a long silence and the papers were eventually forgotten. Watson died in 1965. Many years later when his colleagues J M Whitaker and Robert Rankin cleared Watson&#39;s attic with the intention of incinerating unwanted material, they accidentally stumbled upon the 138 pages of Ramanujan&#39;s work! Thankfully, they recognised them and sent them to Trinity. These have since been published as The Lost Notebook of Ramanujan.</p>
<p>On hearing that there was a lost notebook, Andrews remarked,</p>
<p>"I would mortgage my house to obtain his lost notebook." He has also</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Lost Notebook of Ramanujan // 111</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>said "The discovery of this &#39;Lost Notebook&#39; caused roughly as much stir in the mathematical world as the discovery of Beethoven&#39;s Tenth Symphony would to the musical fraternity." The book contains more than 600 formulae in various topics. People usually state that Ramanujan mostly studied Mock - Theta functions in his last days. But this seems to occupy only about 5% space in the Last Notebook. Berndt has written that,</p>
<p>"The next fundamental question is what is in Ramanujan&#39;s lost notebook besides mock theta functions? A majority of the results fall under the purview of q-series. These include mock theta functions, theta functions, partial theta function expansions, false theta functions, identities connected with the Rogers Fine identity, several results in the theory of partitions, Eisenstein series, modular equations, the Rogers - Ramanujan continued fraction, other q-continued fractions, asymptotic expansions of q-series and q-continued fractions, integrals of theta functions, integrals of q-products, and incomplete elliptic integrals. Other continued fractions, other integrals, infinite series identities, Dirichlet series, approximations, arithmetic functions, numerical calculations, Diophantine equations, and elementary mathematics are some of the further topics examined by Ramanujan in his lost notebook."</p>
<p>It is certainly amazing and startling that Ramanujan did all this on his deathbed, totally aware that his end would come any time.</p>
<p>Bruce Berndt, again has been very active in editing and publishing the Lost Notebooks of Ramanujan. In December, 2011, together with George Andrews he has published the Lost Notebook of Ramanujan Part III.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>112 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>The legacy lives on</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Ramanujan passed away, but not his legacy, not his work, not the million seeds he had sown in the fertile field of mathematics. He has left abundant material for future mathematicians to work on. Scholars at many universities around the world carried on his labour of love. Prof. Berndt at the Illinois University is one of them. He has written more than 100 papers following Ramanujan&#39;s work and also published all the Notebooks. Michael D Hirschhorn of the University of New South Wales in Australia is another illustrious Ramanujan scholar who has also published a number of papers.</p>
<p>Janaki Ammal</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Janaki Ammal left her mother in law&#39;s place for good. This is strange noting the practices of those days. Usually the widow remained with her in laws till her children were capable of taking care of her. Thereafter she lived with children. Janaki Ammal had no issues. Perhaps she did not want to be condemned to live with Ramanujan&#39;s mother. She</p>
<p>chose to live separately and took Fig 25: Janaki Ammal</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The legacy lives on // 113</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>to sewing to earn a living. She came across the young son of one of her friends, who suffered an illness and brought him up. That is Mr. Narayanan who lives now in Chennai with his son and family. He has told the author that she did this service only for people she knew well. It was not for public. The University of Chennai paid her a pension of 20 rupees a month, which they increased to 125 later. Trinity College offered Janaki Ammal a substantial sum in the later years, which she gave away to a trust to help needy students. Janaki Ammal died in 1994. She has said that she kept only two mementos of her husband - the two vessels in which she boiled water to nurse him in his last days and his photograph.</p>
<p>The author had the occasion to meet Narayanan, his wife and children in 2012. When asked whether Janaki Ammal complained or spoke ill of her mother in law (Kaomalathammal) the reply was "Hardly". There may have been one or two occasions when she may have spoken about Komalathammal but it seemed she carried no grudge. It is said that she often felt that her husband should have lived longer and that he died too young.</p>
<p>Janaki Ammal kept her self esteem till her last days. She lived alone but close to where Narayanan and his family lived. However</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>Fig 26: A picture taken before Janaki Ammal’s death</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>114 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>she moved to be with Narayanan as her death came closer. Very meticulous, Janaki Ammal cooked her own food and never let others cook for her. In times of need she asked Narayanan for help. She read newspapers daily and when her eyesight faded, she made one of her "grand kids" read for her. These affectionately recall that Janaki Ammal advised youngsters to study well, be good in mathematics and try to study in reputed universities overseas. Her own stature as Mrs. Ramanujan was enough to inspire others.</p>
<p>Komalathammal</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Mother Komalatammal was extremely upset over her son&#39;s death and wanted to be compensated. She wrote to the Government of Madras appealing for an allowance. She wrote also to the Department of Education, Government of India complaining that Janaki Ammal refused to perform the last rites for Ramanujan and that she had to perform it. It cost her 150 rupees. Further the daughter</p>
<p>- in - law had removed all the silver and furniture out of the house. Komalathammal has asked that the government compensate her. There is a similar letter to an Educational Officer in Ooty; one other to the Government of Madras. Not happy with response, she wrote to Hardy himself in 1927 complaining that she had sent her son to England in the hope that family&#39;s financial condition would improve. What had happened was a disaster. She had to receive some help from him. How Hardy reacted is not known. The agitated and grief stricken Komalathammal died in 1948.</p>
<p>Ramanujan&#39;s brother Lakshmi Narasimhan too wrote to Hardy soon after his (Ramanujan&#39;s) death "We have no property. .. One day passes with great difficulty. . Unless any arrangement is made to support us we have to go a-begging from door to door… It is your bounded duty to protect us." This may have been written on his own accord or his mother&#39;s insistence.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The legacy lives on // 115</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Srinivasa Iyengar became blind in both the eyes and passed away a few months after his son&#39;s death at his age of sixty-five. In fact his end came when he visited Narayana Iyer&#39;s house.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fig 27: A Portrait of Ramanujan</p>
<p>in the Ramanujan Museum, Chennai.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Hardy left Cambridge for a brief spell and went to Oxford. He could not adjust himself there and returned to Cambridge. Towards the end of his life he suffered a stroke and even attempted suicide. He died in 1947.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>116 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Mathematics of Ramanujan // 117</p>
<p>Part 2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<h1>Mathematics of Ramanujan</h1>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Michael D. Hirschhorn</p>
<p>118 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Mathematics of Ramanujan // 119</p>
<ol>
<li>
<h4>Introduction</h4>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>In this part Hirschhorn considers five examples of Ramanujan&#39;s work. It is emphasised that these examples are amongst the simplest things he did! It is felt that the material and the logic should be understood by a student who has studied some mathematics in any university. However, the High school students may be able to appreciate some of the portions.</p>
</li>
<li>
<h4>The taxicab number</h4>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>An anecdote told of Ramanujan, meant to show how "numbers were his best friends" concerns an occasion when Hardy came by taxicab to visit Ramanujan in a nursing home. Hardy reported that he came in cab number 1729, which he thought was a fairly dull number. Ramanujan said "No, Hardy, no, it is a very interesting number. It is the smallest number which is the sum of two cubes in two different ways."</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1729  103  93  123 1.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>In the last year of his life, when he had returned to India, Ramanujan continued to be very busy with mathematics. All we have left of his last year&#39;s work is 138 pages, called his "Lost Notebook". On one page of that notebook, Ramanujan wrote down a way of finding infinitely many sets of three numbers, a, b and c such that</p>
<p><i>a</i>3  <i>b</i>3  <i>c</i>3 1.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>120 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>One example is a = 9, b =10, c =12.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The significance of this is that it had been known for about 100 years that you cannot have three numbers (by which I mean positive whole numbers, no two of which are equal) such that</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>a</i>3  <i>b</i>3  <i>c</i>3.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>So the closest the sum of two cubes can be to a cube is 1 off, in either direction, and what Ramanujan showed is that this happens infinitely often!</p>
<p>This is what Ramanujan did, I believe. I discovered the steps he took by "working backwards". It was not easy.</p>
<p>Ramanujan started with an identity he discovered. We do not know, yet, the steps that led him to this identity, but it certainly depends on the fact, which you can easily check, that</p>
<p>33  43  53  63.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The identity which we will start with is</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(3<i>a</i>2  5<i>ab </i> 5<i>b</i>2 )3  (4<i>a</i>2  4<i>ab </i> 6<i>b</i>2 )3  (5<i>a</i>2  5<i>ab </i> 3<i>b</i>2 )3</p>
<p> (6<i>a</i>2  4<i>ab </i> 4<i>b</i>2 )3.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>It is quite tedious to check this by hand! Both sides come out to be</p>
<p>216<i>a</i>6  432<i>a</i>5<i>b </i> 729<i>a</i>4<i>b</i>2  640<i>a</i>3<i>b</i>3  480<i>a</i>2<i>b</i>4 192<i>ab</i>5  64<i>b</i>6.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>I must emphasise that Ramanujan would not have discovered his identity this way. He would have had a procedure which led him to it. But all of this is lost, because he did all his working on a slate, and rubbed it all out before writing the identity in his notebook, which was meant for his eyes only.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Mathematics of Ramanujan // 121</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>So, anyway, what he probably did next (though we cannot be sure) is make the substitution</p>
<p>a  u  v, b  u  2v</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>When you do this, this is what you get.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>3<i>a</i>2  5<i>ab </i> 5<i>b</i>2  3<i>u </i>2  21<i>uv </i> 27<i>v</i>2 4<i>a</i>2  4<i>ab </i> 6<i>b</i>2  6<i>u</i>2 12<i>uv </i> 36<i>v</i>2 5<i>a</i>2  5<i>ab </i> 3<i>b</i>2  3<i>u </i>2  27<i>uv </i> 3<i>v</i>2 , <i>and </i>6<i>a</i>2  4<i>ab </i> 4<i>b</i>2  6<i>u </i>2  30<i>v</i>2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>and so</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(3<i>u</i>2  21<i>uv </i> 27<i>v</i>2 )3  (6<i>u</i>2 12<i>uv </i> 36<i>v</i>2 )3  (3<i>u</i>2  27<i>uv </i> 3<i>v</i>2 )3</p>
<p> (6<i>u</i>2  30<i>v</i>2 )3.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Now, each term here is divisible by 33, and if we divide by this, we find</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(<i>u</i>2  7<i>uv </i> 9<i>v</i>2 )3  (2<i>u</i>2  4<i>uv </i>12<i>v</i>2 )3  (2<i>u</i>2 10<i>v</i>2 )3  (<i>u</i>2  9<i>uv </i> <i>v</i>2 )3,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>where I have transposed a term to the right side.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>All right, so now we take a deep breath, and look at a topic you may have heard of, and that is Fibonacci numbers. The Fibonacci numbers are usually defined as follows</p>
<p>F0  0,</p>
<p>F1  1 and for</p>
<p>n  2,</p>
<p>Fn  Fn 1  Fn2 .</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>In other words, the first two Fibonacci numbers are 0 and 1, and each subsequent Fibonacci number is the sum of the previous two. So we find that the sequence is</p>
<p>0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144, 233,  .</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>122 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Now, it is well--known that if you take three consecutive</p>
<p>Fibonacci numbers,</p>
<p>Fn1,</p>
<p>Fn and</p>
<p>Fn 1,</p>
<p>multiply the outer two and</p>
<p>subtract the square of the central one, you get ±1. For example, if</p>
<p>you choose 3,5 and 8, you find that</p>
<p>3 8  52  1,</p>
<p>while if you</p>
<p>choose 89, 144 and 233 you find that (check this!)</p>
<p>89  233 1442  1.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>In general,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>n</p>
<p><i>F</i>n1<i>F</i>n1  <i>F </i>2  (1)<i>n</i>.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>This fact can be proved by a method called "mathematical induction", or simply "induction", using the fact that</p>
<p>1</p>
<p><i>F</i>0 <i>F</i>2  <i>F </i>2  1  (1)1,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>together with the fact that</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>k </p>
<p>k</p>
<p><i>F</i>k <i>F</i>k 2  <i>F </i>2 1  (1) (<i>F</i>k 1<i>F</i>k 1  <i>F </i>2 ).</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(But if you don&#39;t know about induction, don&#39;t worry too much. The result is true, and it&#39;s not hard to prove.)</p>
<p>Well, suppose now we have a pseudo-Fibonacci sequence, which starts as before, the first two terms are 0 and 1, but now each term is 9 times the previous term plus the term before,</p>
<p>Fn1  9Fn  Fn1.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The sequence begins</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>0, 1, 9, 82, 747, 6805,  .</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>You can see that the terms grow very quickly. But look what happens if, as before, we choose three consecutive terms and multiply the outer two and subtract the square of the central term.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>182  92  1, 9  747  822  1, 82  6805  7472  1,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Mathematics of Ramanujan // 123</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>and so on. In symbols,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>n</p>
<p><i>F</i>n1<i>F</i>n1  <i>F </i>2  (1)<i>n </i>,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>just as for the Fibonacci numbers.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Now, this equation can be written</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>F </i>2  9<i>F </i> <i>F F</i></p>
<p> (1)n1, or</p>
<p>n n n 1 n1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>F  9F F</p>
<p>2</p>
<p>n n n1</p>
<p>2</p>
<ul>
<li>
<p>F</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p>n1</p>
<p> (1)n1.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>For example, if</p>
<p>n  4, F4  747, F3  82</p>
<p>and</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>F </i>2  9<i>F F </i> <i>F </i>2  7472  9  747  82  822  1  (1)5.</p>
<p>4 4 3 3</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>All right, so now here is what Ramanujan did. In what we did</p>
<p>before, he substituted identity.</p>
<p>Fn for u,</p>
<p>Fn 1</p>
<p>for v, and got the following</p>
<p>n n n 1</p>
<p>n n n1</p>
<p>(<i>F </i>2  7<i>F F</i></p>
<p>2</p>
<ul>
<li>
<p>9<i>F</i></p>
</li>
</ul>
<p>n 1</p>
<p>)3  (2<i>F </i>2  4<i>F F</i></p>
<p>12<i>F </i>2 )3</p>
<p>n n n1</p>
<p>n n 1</p>
<p> (2<i>F </i>2 10<i>F </i>2</p>
<p>)3  (<i>F </i>2  9<i>F F</i></p>
<p>2 3</p>
<p>n 1</p>
<ul>
<li>
<p>F</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p>)</p>
<p>n1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>But as we saw above, the term inside the second pair of</p>
<p>parentheses on the right is equal to</p>
<p>(1)(<i>n</i>1) ,</p>
<p>and since</p>
<p>((1)(<i>n</i>1) )3  (1)(<i>n</i>1) ,</p>
<p>we find</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>n n n1</p>
<p>(<i>F </i>2  7<i>F F</i></p>
<p>2</p>
<ul>
<li>
<p>9<i>F</i></p>
</li>
</ul>
<p>n1</p>
<p>)3  (2<i>F </i>2  4<i>F F</i></p>
<p> 12<i>F </i>2 )3</p>
<p>n n n1</p>
<p>n 1</p>
<p>n n1</p>
<p> (2<i>F </i>2  10<i>F </i>2 )3  (1)<i>n</i>1.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Now let</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>a</i>n  <i>F </i>2  7<i>F F</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> 9<i>F </i>2 , <i>b </i> 2<i>F </i>2  4<i>F F</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>12<i>F </i>2 ,<i>c </i> 2<i>F </i>2 10<i>F </i>2 .</p>
<p>n n n1</p>
<p>n1 n n n n1</p>
<p>n1 n n n1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>124 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Then</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>n n n</p>
<p><i>a</i>3  <i>b</i>3  <i>c</i>3  (1)<i>n</i>1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<table>
<tr>
<td>
<p>n</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Fn</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Fn 1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>an</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>bn</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>cn</p>
</td>
<td>
<p><i>a</i>3  <i>b</i>3</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>c3</p>
<p>n</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>0</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>2</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>2</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>9</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>8</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>2</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>9</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>135</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>138</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>172</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>508447</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>508448</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>3</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>82</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>9</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>11161</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>11468</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>14258</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>2898516861513</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>2898516861512</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>4</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>747</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>82</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>926271</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>951690</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1183258</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1656678927738809511</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1656678927738809512</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>Let us see what Ramanujan has achieved so far.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>n n</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Now, it can be shown that the sequences {<i>a</i>n }, {<i>b</i>n }, {<i>c</i>n } satisfy the recurrence relations</p>
<p>an  82an 1  82an 2  an 3 , bn  82bn 1  82bn 2  bn 3 , cn  82cn 1  82cn 2  cn 3</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>For example,</p>
<p>a5  82  926271 8211161135  76869289, b5  82  951690  82 11468 138  78978818, c5  82 1183258  82 14258 172  98196140</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>and</p>
<p>768692893  789788183  946854503670164647544001,</p>
<p>981961403  946854503670164647544000.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>This is (essentially) what Ramanujan wrote, showing none of the above working:</p>
<p>If a1 = 1, a2 = 135, a3 = 11161, b1 = 2, b2 = 138, b3 = 11468,</p>
<p>c1 = 2, c2 = 172, c3 = 14258</p>
<p>n n n</p>
<p>and if for</p>
<p>n  4, an  82an1  82an 2  an3 ,</p>
<p>and similarly for</p>
<p>bn , cn</p>
<p>then</p>
<p><i>a</i>3  <i>b</i>3  <i>c</i>3  (1)<i>n</i>1.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Mathematics of Ramanujan // 125</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>There are several things to say. First, and most importantly, this is typical of Ramanujan. He wrote something that is correct, and it can be proved to be true, without giving you any idea how he found it. And in this case, he took many steps to get to the final statement! Secondly, we haven&#39;t shown how to get the recurrences, so there is still a step missing, and not a simple one. Thirdly, you will notice that the set of solutions given by this process, or "algorithm", does</p>
<p>not include the solution</p>
<p>93 103  123 1</p>
<p>and fourthly, I would like</p>
<p>to say that I and a younger colleague, Jung Hun Han, found that for</p>
<p>n  2,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>an  63an 1  104bn1  68cn1, bn  64an1  104bn 1  67cn 1, cn  80an 1 131bn1  85cn 1.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>For example,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>a6  63 76869289 104  78978818  63 98196140  6379224759,</p>
<p>b6  64  76869289  104  78978818  67  98196140  6554290188,</p>
<p>c6  80  76869289 131 78978818  85  98196140  8149096378</p>
<p>63792247593  65542901883  541163332466602139785296602151,</p>
<p>81490963783  541163332466602139785296602152</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>As an afterthought, the missing step relies on three calculations like the following.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>n n 1</p>
<p><i>F </i>2  (9<i>F</i></p>
<p> <i>F</i>n 2 )2</p>
<p> 81<i>F </i>2</p>
<p>18<i>F F </i> <i>F </i>2</p>
<p>n 1</p>
<p> 81<i>F </i>2</p>
<p>n 1 n 2 n2</p>
<p>18(9<i>F </i> <i>F </i>)<i>F</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<ul>
<li>
<p>F 2</p>
<p>n 1</p>
<p>n2 n3</p>
<p>n2</p>
<p>n 2</p>
<p> 81<i>F </i>2</p>
<p>163<i>F </i>2</p>
<p>18F F</p>
<p>n 1</p>
<p>n2</p>
<p>n2 n 3</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>126 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>and</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>F</p>
<p>2</p>
<p>n1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> (9Fn2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> <i>F</i>n3 )2</p>
<p> 81<i>F </i>2</p>
<p> 18F F</p>
<p> <i>F </i>2 ,</p>
<p>n2</p>
<p>n 2 n3</p>
<p>n3</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>So, by subtraction,</p>
<p>2 2</p>
<p>F  F</p>
<p>n n1</p>
<p> 81<i>F </i>2</p>
<p> 82<i>F </i>2</p>
<p>2</p>
<ul>
<li>
<p>F</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p>n3</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>n1</p>
<p>n2</p>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>
<h4>Partition numbers</h4>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>A famous old problem of Euler was to find the number of partitions of the number n, that is, the number of different ways of writing n as a sum of numbers, by which I mean positive whole numbers. Thus we want to find the number of solutions of the equation</p>
<p><i>n </i> <i>x</i>1 1  <i>x</i>2  2  <i>x</i>3  3    <i>x</i>n  <i>n</i>.</p>
<p>with</p>
<p>x1,</p>
<p>x2 ,</p>
<p>x3 , </p>
<p>xn  0</p>
<p>For example, if n = 4, we can write</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>4  41  0 2  0  3  0  4</p>
<p> 21 1 2  0  3  0  4</p>
<p> 1  1  0  2  1 3  0  4</p>
<p> 0 1 2  2  0  3  0  4</p>
<p> 0 1 0  2  0  3  1 4.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>There are five solutions, so we say "the number of partitions</p>
<p>of 4 is 5", and we write <i>p</i>(4)  5.</p>
<p>For small values of n it is not too tedious to list all the solutions and find</p>
<p><i>p</i>(0)  1,</p>
<p><i>p</i>(1)  1,</p>
<p><i>p</i>(2)  2,</p>
<p><i>p</i>(3)  3,</p>
<p><i>p</i>(4)  5,</p>
<p><i>p</i>(5)  7,</p>
<p><i>p</i>(6)  11,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>p</i>(7)  15,</p>
<p><i>p</i>(8)  22,</p>
<p><i>p</i>(9)  30, </p>
<p>but it soon becomes impractical.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Mathematics of Ramanujan // 127</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Luckily, Euler discovered a way of calculating p(n) that makes it easier. The derivation of the formula I am about to show you is, however, beyond the scope of this book.</p>
<p>The formula is as follows. For n  1,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>p</i>(<i>n</i>)  <i>p</i>(<i>n </i>1)  <i>p</i>(<i>n </i> 2)  <i>p</i>(<i>n </i> 5)  <i>p</i>(<i>n </i> 7)  <i>p</i>(<i>n </i>12)  <i>p</i>(<i>n </i>15)</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> <i>p</i>(<i>n </i> 22)  <i>p</i>(<i>n </i> 26)     .</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>There are several features of this formula that need explanation. First you observe that the terms on the right come in pairs, with alternating + and – signs. Secondly, the terms on the right are zero as soon as the argument becomes negative. Thus, for example,</p>
<p>p(10)</p>
<p> <i>p</i>(9)  <i>p</i>(8)  <i>p</i>(5)  <i>p</i>(3)  <i>p</i>(2)    </p>
<p> <i>p</i>(9)  <i>p</i>(8)  <i>p</i>(5)  <i>p</i>(3)</p>
<p> 30  22  7  3</p>
<p> 42.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The sum on the right cuts out when the argument becomes negative (in this case, –2). The third feature that needs explanation is the sequence {1,2,5,7,12,15,...} of numbers that appear on the right side, subtracted from n. These are called the "pentagonal" numbers. They can be found as follows.</p>
<p>You may be familiar with the "triangular" numbers. They are</p>
<p>{1,3,6,10,15,21,28,36,...}. They are found as follows.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1  1, 1 2  3, 1  2  3  6, 1  2  3  4  10, 1 2  3  4  5  15,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1  2  3  4  5  6  21, and so on.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Notice that of every three consecutive triangular numbers, two are multiples of 3. They are {3,6,15,21,36,45,66,78} and so on. If</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>128 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>we divide these by 3, we obtain the sequence {1,2,5,7,12,15,22,26,} and so on. These are the pentagonal numbers.</p>
<p>So we can continue calculating the so-called "partition numbers",</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>p</i>(11)  <i>p</i>(10)  <i>p</i>(9)  <i>p</i>(6)  <i>p</i>(4)  42  30 11  5  56,</p>
<p><i>p</i>(12)  <i>p</i>(11)  <i>p</i>(10)  <i>p</i>(7)  <i>p</i>(5)  <i>p</i>(0)  56  42 15  7 1  77, <i>p</i>(13)  <i>p</i>(12)  <i>p</i>(11)  <i>p</i>(8)  <i>p</i>(6)  <i>p</i>(1)  77  56  22 11 1  101, <i>p</i>(14)  <i>p</i>(13)  <i>p</i>(12)  <i>p</i>(9)  <i>p</i>(7)  <i>p</i>(2)  <i>p</i>(0)</p>
<p> 101 77  30 15  2  1  135</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>and so on.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Indeed, if you managed to list the solutions of the equation</p>
<p>14  <i>x</i>1 1  <i>x</i>2  2  </p>
<p> x14 14</p>
<p>with</p>
<p>x1, x2 ,..., x14  0,</p>
<p>without</p>
<p>missing any, you would find precisely 135 solutions.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>In about 1914, while Ramanujan was at Cambridge, Major Percy A. MacMahon extended this table of values up to n=200. Note that he did this without any sort of computer, and did it correctly, which is no mean feat, and found, for example, that</p>
<p><i>p</i>(200)  3972999829388</p>
<p>(Imagine having to list all the solutions!)</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>MacMahon displayed his answers in a table in columns of five values, like this.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<table>
<tr>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>7</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>42</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>176</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>697</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1958</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>5604</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>…</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>11</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>56</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>231</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>792</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>2436</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>6842</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>…</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>2</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>15</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>77</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>297</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1002</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>3010</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>8349</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>…</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>3</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>22</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>101</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>385</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1255</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>3718</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>10143</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>…</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>5</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>30</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>135</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>490</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1575</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>4565</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>12310</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>….</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Mathematics of Ramanujan // 129</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>When Ramanujan saw this table of values, he noticed something that no-one else had ever seen before, and that is, that the partition numbers at the foot of each column of five are all multiples of 5! That is to say, if n is of the form 5m+4, then <i>p</i>(<i>n</i>)  <i>p </i>(5<i>m </i> 4) is divisible by 5.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>He also noticed that</p>
<p>p(7m  5)</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>is divisible by 7 and that</p>
<p>p(11m  6) is divisible by 11.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>He noticed other patterns as well, and all these patterns were proved (by the year 1957) to continue. Other patterns (much more difficult to notice) have also been found, and are still being found today.</p>
<p>I would now like to try and sketch a proof of the fact that</p>
<p>p(5m  4) is divisible by 5.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>We will start with our friends, the Fibonacci numbers,</p>
<p>{0,1,1,2,3,5, ...}. Actually, it is slightly more convenient to study the so--called "shifted" Fibonacci numbers, {1,1,2,3,5,...}, which are</p>
<p>usually denoted by</p>
<p>fn  fn 1  fn2.</p>
<p>fn .</p>
<p>Thus,</p>
<p>f0  1,</p>
<p>f1  1</p>
<p>and for</p>
<p>n  2,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The table of shifted Fibonacci numbers corresponding to the table for the partition numbers above is</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<table>
<tr>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>8</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>89</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>987</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>10946</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>121393</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1346269</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>….</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>13</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>144</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1597</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>17711</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>196418</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>2178309</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>….</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>2</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>21</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>233</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>2584</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>28657</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>317811</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>3524578</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>….</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>3</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>34</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>377</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>4181</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>46368</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>514229</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>5702887</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>….</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>5</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>55</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>610</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>6765</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>75025</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>832040</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>9227465</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>….</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>130 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>and you might notice the truly amazing fact that, once again, the numbers at the foot of each column are divisible by 5 ! That is,</p>
<p>f5<i>m</i>4</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>is divisible by 5.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>I would like to prove this fact for you before going on to sketch the proof of the corresponding fact for the partition numbers. Unfortunately, the proof of the partition numbers fact requires more mathematical background than I can assume you have.</p>
<p>The first thing I will introduce is the so-called "generating function" of the shifted Fibonacci numbers. We define a function, f(x), as follows.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>f </i>(<i>x</i>)  1 <i>x </i> 2<i>x</i>2  3<i>x</i>3  5<i>x</i>4  8<i>x</i>5 </p>
<p>  <i>f</i>n <i>xn </i>  .</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Suppose we multiply f(x) by x, and then by x2.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> </p>
<p>x2 f (x) </p>
<p><i>x</i>2  <i>x</i>3  2<i>x</i>4  </p>
<p> <i>f</i>n2 <i>xn </i>  .</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Now we subtract</p>
<p>xf (x)</p>
<p>and</p>
<p>x2 f (x)</p>
<p>from f (x). We find that</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>f </i>(<i>x</i>)  <i>xf </i>(<i>x</i>)  <i>x</i>2 <i>f </i>(<i>x</i>)  1.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>This is a most amazing result. All the terms on the right have</p>
<p>cancelled, except the "1" ! This happens because for each n  2 ,</p>
<p>the coefficient of</p>
<p>xn ,</p>
<p>fn  fn1  fn2</p>
<p>is zero, while for n = 1, the</p>
<p>coefficient of x is zero also.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>So we find the formula,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(1 <i>x </i> <i>x</i>2 ) <i>f </i>(<i>x</i>)  1,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Mathematics of Ramanujan // 131</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>or,</p>
<p><i>f </i>(<i>x</i>) <u> 1</u> ,</p>
<p>1  <i>x </i> <i>x</i>2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>and this is the generating function of the shifted Fibonacci numbers. In some sense, all the shifted Fibonacci numbers are "bottled up" in this neat function. Indeed, it is possible to use the generating function to find formulas for the shifted Fibonacci numbers, and hence the Fibonacci numbers, but this is besides our goal.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>In order to prove that</p>
<p>f5<i>m</i>4</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>is divisible by 5, we now require</p>
<p>a miraculous formula, and that is,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1</p>
<p>1 <i>x </i> <i>x</i>2</p>
<p>1  <i>x </i> 2<i>x</i>2  3<i>x</i>3  5<i>x</i>4  3<i>x</i>5  2<i>x</i>6  <i>x</i>7  <i>x</i>8</p>
<p></p>
<p>.</p>
<p>1 11<i>x</i>5  <i>x</i>10</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>It is easy to check this formula. Just cross--multiply, and expand to show that</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(1 <i>x </i> <i>x</i>2 )(1 <i>x </i> 2<i>x</i>2  3<i>x</i>3  5<i>x</i>4  3<i>x</i>5  2<i>x</i>6  <i>x</i>7  <i>x</i>8 )  111<i>x</i>5  <i>x</i>10.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Of course, this formula doesn&#39;t come "from nowhere" ! It comes about by the use of the complex fifth roots of unity, that is, the (five) complex numbers whose fifth powers are equal to 1. But I am not going to assume you are familiar with this area of mathematics.</p>
<p>Just in case you are familiar with complex numbers, I will show you what&#39;s involved. Let  be a fifth root of unity other than 1. We write</p>
<p>1</p>
<p>1 <i>x </i> <i>x</i>2</p>
<p>(1   <i>x </i>  2 <i>x</i>2 )(1   2 <i>x </i>  4 <i>x</i>2 )(1   3 <i>x </i>  6 <i>x</i>2 )(1  4 <i>x </i>  8 <i>x</i>2 )</p>
<p></p>
<p>(1 <i>x </i> <i>x</i>2 )(1   <i>x </i>  2 <i>x</i>2 )(1   2 <i>x </i>  4 <i>x</i>2 )(1   3<i>x </i>  6 <i>x</i>2 )(1   4 <i>x </i>  8 <i>x</i>2 )</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>132 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>and multiply out the top and bottom and make use of the facts that</p>
<p> 5  1</p>
<p>and 1     2   3   4  0 .</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>In any case, we have that</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>f0  f1 x  f2 x2  f3 x3  f4 x4  f5 x5  </p>
<p></p>
<p>1  <i>x </i> 2<i>x</i>2  3<i>x</i>3  5<i>x</i>4  3<i>x</i>5  2<i>x</i>6  <i>x</i>7  <i>x</i>8</p>
<p>.</p>
<p>111<i>x</i>5  <i>x</i>10</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Because the denominator of the right side is a function of x5, it is possible to extract from this equation every fifth term, and obtain, for example,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>4 9 14 19</p>
<p>5<i>x</i>4</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>f4 x</p>
<p> f9 x  f14 x  f19 x</p>
<p>   .</p>
<p>111<i>x</i>5  <i>x</i>10</p>
<p>The fact that we can write this</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>4 9 14 19 x4</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>f4 x</p>
<ul>
<li>
<p>f9 x</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>f14 x</p>
<ul>
<li>
<p>f19 x</p>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
<p>   5</p>
<p>111<i>x</i>5  <i>x</i>10</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>proves that</p>
<p>f5<i>m</i>4</p>
<p>is divisible by 5.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Now we want to mimic this procedure to prove that p(5m+4) is divisible by 5. I am going to have to miss out on explaining some crucial steps. The first of these goes back to Euler. The generating function for the partition numbers can be shown to be</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>p</i>(0)  <i>p</i>(1)<i>x </i> <i>p</i>(2)<i>x</i>2  <i>p</i>(3)<i>x</i>3  <i>p</i>(4)<i>x</i>4  <i>p</i>(5)<i>x</i>5  </p>
<p> 1 . 1 <i>x </i> <i>x</i>2  <i>x</i>5  <i>x</i>7  <i>x</i>12  <i>x</i>15  <i>x</i>22  <i>x</i>26     </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Notice that the denominator starts off looking like the denominator of the generating function for the shifted Fibonacci</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Mathematics of Ramanujan // 133</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>numbers, but continues, with terms coming in pairs of positive and negative terms, and the powers that occur are the pentagonal numbers.</p>
<p>Now Ramanujan noticed that in the denominator, the powers of x that occur are never 1 or 2 less than a multiple of 5. They are all either multiples of 5 or 1 or 2 more that a multiple of 5. We can group together all those terms in which the power of x are multiples of 5, all those terms in which the power of x is 1 more than a multiple of 5, and all those terms in which the power of x is 2 more than a power of x. Thus,</p>
<p><i>p </i> 0   <i>p </i>1  <i>x </i> <i>p </i> 2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p><i>x</i>2  <i>p </i>3</p>
<p><i>x</i>3  <i>p</i></p>
<p>4  <i>x</i>4  <i>p </i>5</p>
<p>1</p>
<p><i>x</i>5  </p>
<p>(1 <i>x</i>5  <i>x</i>15  )  (<i>x </i> <i>x</i>26  )  (<i>x</i>2  <i>x</i>7  <i>x</i>12  <i>x</i>22  )</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>We can write this</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>p</i>(0)  <i>p</i>(1)<i>x </i> <i>p</i>(2)<i>x</i>2  <i>p</i>(3)<i>x</i>3  <i>p</i>(4)<i>x</i>4  <i>p</i>(5)<i>x</i>5  </p>
<p> 1</p>
<p>(1  <i>x</i>5  <i>x</i>15 )  <i>x</i>(1  <i>x</i>25 )  <i>x</i>2 (1 <i>x</i>5  <i>x</i>10  <i>x</i>20 )</p>
<p> 1 ,</p>
<p>A  xB  x2C</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>where</p>
<p><i>A </i> 1 <i>x</i>5  <i>x</i>15  ,</p>
<p><i>B </i> 1 <i>x</i>25  ,</p>
<p><i>C </i> 1  <i>x</i>5  <i>x</i>10  .</p>
<p>Ramanujan proved that A,B and C have the marvellous</p>
<p>property that</p>
<p>AC  B2.</p>
<p>(He did much more than that. He gave neat formulas for A,B</p>
<p>and C, since proved by others.)</p>
<p>Notice that in the case of the generating function for the shifted Fibonacci numbers, we can write</p>
<p>f0  f1x  f2 x2  f3x3  f4 x4  f5 x5  </p>
<p> 1 ,</p>
<p>A  xB  x2C</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>134 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>and then</p>
<p>A  B  C  1, and AC  B2 ! And it turns out that that is all</p>
<p>we need to show that</p>
<p>p(5m  4)</p>
<p>is divisible by 5.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>For,</p>
<p><i>p</i>(0)  <i>p</i>(1)<i>x </i> <i>p</i>(2)<i>x</i>2  <i>p</i>(3)<i>x</i>3  <i>p</i>(4)<i>x</i>4  <i>p</i>(5)<i>x</i>5  </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> 1</p>
<p>A  xB  x2C</p>
<p> 1 </p>
<p>B</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>A4 A3</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1</p>
<p>A  x  x2 B B A</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>2 A2 3 A</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>4 5 B</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>6 B2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>B3</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>B 4</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<ul>
<li>
<p>x  2x</p>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ol>
<p> 3x  5x  3x  2x  x  x</p>
<p> 1  B 4 B3</p>
<p>B 2 B A</p>
<p>A2 A3</p>
<p>A4 ,</p>
<p>B A5</p>
<p>B5</p>
<p> 11x</p>
<p>5 10 B5</p>
<p></p>
<p>x</p>
<p>A5</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>and it follows that</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>4 9 14 19 x4</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>p(4)x</p>
<p> <i>p</i>(9)<i>x</i></p>
<p> <i>p</i>(14)<i>x</i></p>
<p> <i>p</i>(19)<i>x</i></p>
<p>   5 </p>
<p> A5</p>
<p>,</p>
<p></p>
<p>5 10 B5 </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>B  11x  x</p>
<p>5 5</p>
<p> B A </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>and our goal is reached!</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Before going on to our third topic, I thought I would show you some formulas that I have held back, only because they are a little harder to prove. First we have Euler&#39;s formula,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>p</i>(0)  <i>p</i>(1)<i>x </i> <i>p</i>(2)<i>x</i>2  <i>p</i>(3)<i>x</i>3  <i>p</i>(4)<i>x</i>4  <i>p</i>(5)<i>x</i>5  </p>
<p> 1</p>
<p>(1  <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>2 )(1 <i>x</i>3 )(1 <i>x</i>4 )(1 <i>x</i>5 )</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>which, together with his formula</p>
<p>(1  <i>x</i>)(1  <i>x</i>2 )(1  <i>x</i>3)(1  <i>x</i>4 )(1  <i>x</i>5 )</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Mathematics of Ramanujan // 135</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> 1 <i>x </i> <i>x</i>2  <i>x</i>5  <i>x</i>7  <i>x</i>12  <i>x</i>15     </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>gives the formula</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>p</i>(0)  <i>p</i>(1)<i>x </i> <i>p</i>(2)<i>x</i>2  <i>p</i>(3)<i>x</i>3  <i>p</i>(4)<i>x</i>4  <i>p</i>(5)<i>x</i>5  </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> 1 , 1 <i>x </i> <i>x</i>2  <i>x</i>5  <i>x</i>7  <i>x</i>12  <i>x</i>15     </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>which we saw earlier.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Next, we have Ramanujan&#39;s formula,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1  <i>x </i> <i>x</i>2  <i>x</i>5  <i>x</i>7  <i>x</i>12  <i>x</i>15      <i>A </i> <i>xB </i> <i>x</i>2<i>C</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>where</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(1  <i>x</i>10 )(1  <i>x</i>15 )(1  <i>x</i>25 )(1  <i>x</i>35)(1  <i>x</i>40 )(1  <i>x</i>50 )(1  <i>x</i>60 )(1  <i>x</i>65 )(1  <i>x</i>75 )</p>
<p>A </p>
<p>(1  <i>x</i>5 )(1  <i>x</i>20 )(1  <i>x</i>30 )(1  <i>x</i>45 )(1  <i>x</i>55 )(1  <i>x</i>70 )</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>B </i> (1  <i>x</i>25 )(1 <i>x</i>50 )(1  <i>x</i>75 ) ,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(1  <i>x</i>5 )(1  <i>x</i>20 )(1  <i>x</i>25 )(1  <i>x</i>30 )(1  <i>x</i>45 )(1  <i>x</i>50 )(1  <i>x</i>55 )(1  <i>x</i>70 )(1  <i>x</i>75 )</p>
<p>C  ,</p>
<p>(1  <i>x</i>5 )(1  <i>x</i>20 )(1  <i>x</i>30 )(1  <i>x</i>45 )(1  <i>x</i>55 )(1  <i>x</i>70 )</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>and, finally, the formula often described as "Ramanujan&#39;s most beautiful formula",</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>p</i>(4)<i>x</i>4  <i>p</i>(9)<i>x</i>9  <i>p</i>(14)<i>x</i>14  <i>p</i>(19)<i>x</i>19 + </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> 5x</p>
<p>(1 <i>x</i>25 )5 (1  <i>x</i>50 )5 (1  <i>x</i>75 )5 (1  <i>x</i>100 )5 </p>
<p>4</p>
<p>.</p>
<p>(1  <i>x</i>5 )6 (1 <i>x</i>10 )6 (1 <i>x</i>15 )6 (1 <i>x</i>20 )6 </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>136 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</li>
<li>
<h4>Ramanujan&#39;s solution to the "house-number" problem</h4>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Suppose the number of the house is N, and that there are M</p>
<p>houses on the street. Then we know</p>
<p>1  2 ..  (<i>N </i> 1)  (<i>N </i>1) .  <i>M </i>.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>That is,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>or</p>
<p>(<i>N </i>1)<i>N </i> <i>M </i>(<i>M </i>1)  <i>N </i>(<i>N </i> 1) , 2 2 2</p>
<p><i>N </i>2  <i>M </i>(<i>M </i> 1) .</p>
<p>2</p>
<p>This can be written</p>
<p>(2<i>M </i> 1)2  2(2<i>N </i>)2  1.</p>
<p>If we let X</p>
<p> 2M 1, Y</p>
<p> 2 <i>N </i>,</p>
<p>then X is odd, Y is even and</p>
<p><i>X </i>2  2<i>Y </i>2  1.</p>
<p>Now, it is well known that all the solutions of this equation come from the convergents to the continued fraction for 2 , namely</p>
<p>2  1 </p>
<p>2 </p>
<p>1 .</p>
<p>1</p>
<p>2  1</p>
<p>2 .</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The convergents are given by the table</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<table>
<tr>
<td>
<p>p</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>3</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>7</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>17</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>41</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>99</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>239</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>577</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>.....</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>q</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>2</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>5</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>12</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>29</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>70</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>169</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>408</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>.......</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Mathematics of Ramanujan // 137</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Thus, for example,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>992  2  702  1.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>All the solutions of X2 – 2Y2 = 1 with X odd and Y even are given by</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<table>
<tr>
<td>
<p>X</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>3</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>17</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>99</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>577</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>......</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>Y</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>2</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>12</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>70</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>408</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>......</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Thus all solutions for M and N are given by</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<table>
<tr>
<td>
<p>M</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>8</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>49</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>288</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>.....</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>N</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>6</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>35</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>204</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>......</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The values of M satisfy the recurrence</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Mk  6Mk 1  Mk 2  2,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>while the values of N satisfy the recurrence</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Nk  6Nk 1  Nk 2 .</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>It follows that the values of N are given by the continued fraction</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>6  1</p>
<p>6  1</p>
<p>6  ... ,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>in the sense that the convergents are given by</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<table>
<tr>
<td>
<p>p</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>6</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>35</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>204</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>.....</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>q</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>6</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>35</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>.......</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>and are the ratios of two successive solutions for N.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>138 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>So it is possible that the "continued fraction" dictated by Ramanujan to Mahalanobis was</p>
<p>6  1</p>
<p>6  1</p>
<p>6  ... ,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>but I have a different theory.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>If we denote this continued fraction by C then</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>C  6  1</p>
<p>C</p>
<p>or,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>This leads to</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>C </i>2  6<i>C </i>1.</p>
<p>(<i>C </i> 3)2  8,</p>
<p>so C  3  8.</p>
<p>Now, the regular continued fraction for 3  8 is</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>3  8  5 </p>
<p>1 </p>
<p>1 ,</p>
<p>1</p>
<p>4  1</p>
<p>1 1</p>
<p>4  1</p>
<p>1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The convergents of this continued fraction are</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<table>
<tr>
<td>
<p>pn</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>5</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>6</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>29</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>35</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>169</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>204</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>.....</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>qn</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>5</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>6</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>29</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>35</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>......</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Every second convergent is the ratio of two successive values for N.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>I suggest that this was the continued fraction dictated by Ramanujan.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Mathematics of Ramanujan // 139</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Additional comments</p>
<ul>
<li>
<p>The values of M and N satisfy the recurrences</p>
<p>Mk  3Mk 1  4Nk 1 1, Nk  2Mk 1  3Nk 1  1.</p>
<p>Thus, from the solution M = 49, N = 35, we get the solution</p>
<p>M = 288, N = 204, and so on.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>We can find the values of M and N from the continued fraction for 2 as follows. The convergents are</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<table>
<tr>
<td>
<p>p</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>3 7</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>17 41</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>99</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>239</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>577</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>...</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>q</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>2 5</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>12 29</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>70</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>169</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>408</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>.....</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>We obtain solutions for N from N = pq, while M is the smaller of the two numbers p2 and 2q2. Thus</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<table>
<tr>
<td>
<p>p</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>3</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>7</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>17</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>41</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>99</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>239</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>577</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>...</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>q</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>2</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>5</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>12</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>29</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>70</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>169</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>408</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>.....</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>N = pq</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>6</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>35</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>204</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1189</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>6930</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>40391</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>235416</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>.......</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>p2 1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>9</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>49</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>289</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1681</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>9801</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>57121</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>332929</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>.....</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>2q2</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>2</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>8</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>50</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>288</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1682</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>9800</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>57122</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>332928</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>.....</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>M =</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>8</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>49</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>288</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1681</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>9800</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>57121</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>332928</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>.....</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>min(p2,2q2)</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>It is also true that the values for M and N satisfy</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Mk  3Mk 1 </p>
<p>8<i>M</i>k 1(<i>M</i>k 1 1)  1, <i>N</i>k  3<i>N</i>k 1 </p>
<p>8<i>N </i>2k 1  1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>or</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>M</i>k  3    1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>  1 , <i>N</i>k  3  8  1 .</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p><i>M </i>81 <i>M</i></p>
<p> <i>M N </i><i>N </i>2</p>
<p>k 1</p>
<p> k 1 </p>
<p>k 1</p>
<p>k 1</p>
<p>k 1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>140 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</li>
<li>
<h4>A continued fraction</h4>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Consider the number  is known as the "golden ratio", and is closely connected to the Fibonacci numbers, and to phyllotaxis. Indeed, it can be shown that</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Fn</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>satisfies the quadratic equation  It follows that</p>
<p>We can iterate this indefinitely, and get</p>
<p>1</p>
<p>1</p>
<p>1 1</p>
<p>1</p>
<p></p>
<p>This was known to Ramanujan, who instead considered the continued fraction, which I shall denote by Φ,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Φ  1</p>
<p>x</p>
<p>x2</p>
<p>1</p>
<p>x3</p>
<p>1 1  </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Indeed, he considered the even more general continued fraction,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>a ax</p>
<p>ax2</p>
<p>1 3</p>
<p>1 </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Mathematics of Ramanujan // 141</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>We will now show that</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>ax a 2 x4</p>
<p>a3 x9</p>
<p>1 (1  <i>x</i>)  (1 <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>2 )  (1 <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>2 )(1 <i>x</i>3 ) </p>
<p>Φ(<i>a</i>) </p>
<p>ax2</p>
<p>a2 x6</p>
<p>a3 x12</p>
<p>1 (1  <i>x</i>)  (1 <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>2 )  (1 <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>2 )(1 <i>x</i>3 ) </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Here the powers of x in the numerator are the squares {1,4,9,... }, while the powers of x in the denominator are the numbers of the</p>
<p>form n(n 1),{2,6,12,...}.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>This looks formidable, but it turns out not to be too hard!</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>x ) (1</p>
<p>ax a2 x4</p>
<p>a3 x9</p>
<p>Let</p>
<p><i>P</i>(<i>a</i>)  1 (1  <i>x</i>)  (1  <i>x</i>)(1 2   <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>2 )(1 <i>x</i>3)   .</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>We will show that</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>P</i>(<i>a</i>)  <i>P</i>(<i>ax</i>)  <i>axP</i>(<i>ax</i>2 ).</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>We have</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>ax2</p>
<p>a2 x6</p>
<p>a3 x12</p>
<p>x ) (1</p>
<p><i>P</i>(<i>ax</i>)  1  (1  <i>x</i>)  (1  <i>x</i>)(1 2   <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>2 )(1 <i>x</i>3 )   ,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>x ) (1</p>
<p>2 ax3</p>
<p>a2 x8</p>
<p>a3 x15</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>and</p>
<p>P(ax</p>
<p>)  1  (1 <i>x</i>)  (1  <i>x</i>)(1 2   <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>2 )(1 <i>x</i>3 )  </p>
<p>x ) (1</p>
<p>2 a2 x4</p>
<p>a3 x9</p>
<p>a4 x16</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>axP(ax</p>
<p>)  <i>ax </i> (1  <i>x</i>)  (1  <i>x</i>)(1 2   <i>x</i>)(1  <i>x</i>2 )(1  <i>x</i>3 )   .</p>
<p>If we now consider the quantity</p>
<p><i>P</i>(<i>a</i>)  <i>P</i>(<i>ax</i>)  <i>axP</i>(<i>ax</i>2 ),</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>142 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>we find</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>P</i>(<i>a</i>)  <i>P</i>(<i>ax</i>)  <i>axP</i>(<i>ax</i>2 )</p>
<p>  <i>x x</i>2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p> 2  x4</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>x6 x4 </p>
<p></p>
<p></p>
<p>a  (1 </p>
<p>  <i>x </i>  <i>a</i></p>
<p> 2  2 </p>
<p></p>
<p> 3 </p>
<p><i>x</i>) (1  <i>x</i>)</p>
<p>x9</p>
<p>  (1 <i>x</i>)(1  <i>x</i></p>
<p>x12</p>
<p>) (1  <i>x</i>)(1  <i>x </i>)</p>
<p>x9</p>
<p>(1 <i>x</i>) </p>
<p></p>
<p></p>
<p><i>a </i> (1  <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>2 )(1 3   <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>2 )(1 3   <i>x</i>)(1  <i>x</i>2 )   .</p>
<p> <i>x </i>) (1 <i>x </i>) (1 </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Now, the coefficient of</p>
<p>an is</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>xn2</p>
<p>(1  <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>2 )</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>xn )</p>
<p>xn ( n1)</p>
<p> (1 <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>2 )</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>xn )</p>
<p>xn 2</p>
<p> (1  <i>x</i>)(1  <i>x</i>2 )</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>xn 1 )</p>
<p>xn2</p>
<p>xn(n 1)</p>
<p>xn 2 (1 <i>xn </i>)</p>
<p> (1  <i>x</i>)(1  <i>x</i>2 )(1  xn )  (1 <i>x</i>)(1  <i>x</i>2 )(1  xn )  (1 <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>2 )(1  xn )</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>xn 2  xn(n1) </p>
<p></p>
<p>xn 2</p>
<p>(1  <i>xn </i>)</p>
<p>(1 <i>x</i>) (1 <i>x</i>2 )(1  <i>xn </i>)</p>
<p> 0</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>since the numerator is zero.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Thus we have shown that</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>P</i>(<i>a</i>)  <i>P</i>(<i>ax</i>)  <i>axP</i>(<i>ax</i>2 ).</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>This can be written</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>P(a)</p>
<p>P(ax)</p>
<p> 1 </p>
<p>ax .</p>
<p>P(ax) </p>
<p> </p>
<p><b> </b>P(ax2 ) </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Mathematics of Ramanujan // 143</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>We can iterate this indefinitely, and get</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>P(a)</p>
<p>P(ax)</p>
<p> 1</p>
<p>ax .</p>
<p>ax2</p>
<p>1 </p>
<p>ax3</p>
<p>1  1 </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Thus we have</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Φ(<i>a</i>)  1 </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>ax</p>
<p>ax2</p>
<p>1</p>
<p>ax3</p>
<p>1  1  </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>P(a)</p>
<p></p>
<p>P(ax)</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>ax a 2 x4</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>a3 x9</p>
<p>1  (1  <i>x</i>)  (1  <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>2 )  (1  <i>x</i>)(1  <i>x</i>2 )(1  <i>x</i>3) </p>
<p></p>
<p>ax2</p>
<p>a2 x6</p>
<p>a3x12</p>
<p>1  (1  <i>x</i>)  (1  <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>2 )  (1  <i>x</i>)(1  <i>x</i>2 )(1  <i>x</i>3) </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>as stated earlier.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>If we now set a=1, we find that</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Φ  1</p>
<p>x</p>
<p>x2</p>
<p>1</p>
<p>x3</p>
<p>1  1 </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>x x4 x9</p>
<p>1 (1  <i>x</i>)  (1  <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>2 )  (1  <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>2 )(1 <i>x</i>3 )  </p>
<p></p>
<p>x2 x6</p>
<p>x12</p>
<p>1 (1  <i>x</i>)  (1  <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>2 )  (1  <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>2 )(1 <i>x</i>3 )  </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>144 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Well, that was the "easy" bit, at least for Ramanujan. For, now he stated that</p>
<p>x x4 x9</p>
<p>x ) (1</p>
<p>1 (1  <i>x</i>)  (1  <i>x</i>)(1 2   <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>2 )(1 <i>x</i>3)  </p>
<p> 1 , (1  <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>4 )(1 <i>x</i>6 )(1  <i>x</i>9 )(1 <i>x</i>11)(1 <i>x</i>14 )</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>and</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>x2 x6 x12</p>
<p>x ) (1</p>
<p>1 (1 <i>x</i>)  (1  <i>x</i>)(1 2   <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>2 )(1 <i>x</i>3 )  </p>
<p> 1</p>
<p>(1  <i>x</i>2 )(1 <i>x</i>3 )(1 <i>x</i>7 )(1 <i>x</i>8 )(1 <i>x</i>12 )(1  <i>x</i>13 )</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(Ramanujan had trouble proving these identities. It seems that his proof relied on the proof by another, older mathematician,</p>
<p>L. J. Rogers. Consequently, these identities are known as the "Rogers--Ramanujan identities".)</p>
<p>The consequence is that</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Φ  1 <i>x </i></p>
<p>x2</p>
<p>(1  <i>x</i>2 )(1  <i>x</i>3 )(1 <i>x</i>7 )(1  <i>x</i>8 )(1  <i>x</i>12 )(1  <i>x</i>13)</p>
<p>.</p>
<p>(1  <i>x</i>)(1 <i>x</i>4 )(1  <i>x</i>6 )(1 <i>x</i>9 )(1 <i>x</i>11)(1 <i>x</i>14 )</p>
<p>1 </p>
<p>x3</p>
<p>1 1 </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>And finally, if we let x  1 , we obtain</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>  1 5  2 3  7  8  12 13   ,</p>
<p></p>
<p>2 1 4 6  9 1114</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>which is a mild curiosity.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Mathematics of Ramanujan // 145</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The real surprise is that the continued fraction  can be expressed as such a beautiful infinite product.</p>
<p>And, yes, in my opinion this is still one of Ramanujan&#39;s simpler results!</p>
</li>
<li>
<h4>An arithmetic fact</h4>
</li>
</ol>
<p>In his "Lost Notebook", Ramanujan writes</p>
<p>5 3  2<i>g </i> 5 4<i>g </i> 4 2 3</p>
<p>If <i>g </i>4  5 , then</p>
<p> 2  g  g  g</p>
<p>5 3  2<i>g </i> 5 4<i>g </i> 4</p>
<p>5 3  2  4 5  5 4  4 5  4 </p>
<p>4 4 4</p>
<p></p>
<p>In other words</p>
<p>5 3  2  4 5  5 4  4 5  4</p>
<p>2  5  25 </p>
<p>125</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Let&#39;s see how Ramanujan might have found this. We start as follows, using the binomial theorem.</p>
<p>(<i>g </i> 1)5</p>
<p> <i>g</i>5  5<i>g </i>4 10<i>g</i>3 10<i>g </i>2  5<i>g </i> 1</p>
<p> 5<i>g </i> 5 5 10<i>g </i>3 10<i>g</i>2  5<i>g </i>1</p>
<p> 10<i>g</i>3  10<i>g </i>2  10<i>g </i> 26</p>
<p> 10 ( <i>g</i>3  <i>g </i>2  <i>g </i>1) 16</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> 10</p>
<p><i>g </i>4 1</p>
<p>g 1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>16</p>
<p> 10 5 1 16</p>
<p>g 1</p>
<p> 40</p>
<p>g 1</p>
<p> 16</p>
<p> 40 16(<i>g </i>1)</p>
<p>g 1</p>
<p> 16<i>g </i> 24</p>
<p>g 1</p>
<p> 32 3  2<i>g</i></p>
<p>4<i>g </i> 4</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>146 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>It follows that</p>
<p>3  2<i>g </i><u> </u><u><i>g </i></u> <u>1</u> .</p>
<p>5 4<i>g </i> 4 2</p>
<p>Then we have</p>
<p>5 3  2<i>g </i> 5 4<i>g </i> 4 </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>3  2<i>g</i></p>
<p></p>
<p>5 1</p>
<p>4 <i>g </i> 4</p>
<p></p>
<p>5 3  2 <i>g </i> 5 4 <i>g </i> 4 3  2<i>g</i></p>
<p>5 1</p>
<p>4<i>g </i> 4</p>
<p><u><i> g </i></u><u>1</u> 1</p>
<p> 2</p>
<p><u><i> g </i></u> <u>1</u> 1</p>
<p>2</p>
<p> <i>g </i> 3</p>
<p>g 1</p>
<p> 1  4  1  5 1  1 </p>
<p></p>
<p><i>g </i>4 1</p>
<p>g 1</p>
<p>g 1</p>
<p>g 1</p>
<p> 1  (1  <i>g </i> <i>g </i>2  <i>g </i>3)</p>
<p> 2  <i>g </i> <i>g </i>2  <i>g</i>3.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>and we are done!</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>It seems that Ramanujan was driven by the fact that in the</p>
<p>binomial expansion, g5 became 5g, which combined with the other</p>
<p>5g to give 10g, and the coefficient 10 matched the other coefficients</p>
<p>10, to give the geometric series And so on.</p>
<p><i>g </i>3  <i>g </i>2  <i>g </i> 1, which can be summed.</p>
<p>So we have seen five examples of Ramanujan at work. The first example shows Ramanujan&#39;s cleverness in combining the solutions of two problems to come up with a surprising result, the second demonstrates Ramanujan&#39;s amazing powers with algebra, the third is somewhat mysterious, the fourth shows how beautiful is some of Ramanujan&#39;s work, and the fifth shows the strangeness of some of his work.</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Appendix</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<ol>
<li>
<h4>Contributions of Ramanujam</h4>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Ramanujam has made a positive contribution to the following topics in mathematics</p>
<ul>
<li>
<p>Bernoulli Numbers</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Continued Fractions</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Partitions Numbers</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Prime Numbers</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Ramanujam&#39;s Conjecture: The Tau Function</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>An expansion for </p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Taxi Number or Hardy-Ramanujam Number</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Highly Composite Numbers</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Hypergeometric Series</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Mock Theta Functions</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>q - series</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Modular Equations</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Singular Moduli</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>148 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>
<h4>Passport details of Ramanujan</h4>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>It is interesting that his passport used when he left Cambridge has been traced. According to it, following are the details for Ramanujan.</p>
<p>DESCRIPTION OF BEARER</p>
<p>Age: 30, Profession: research scholar</p>
<p>Place and Date of birth; Erode, India, Dec. 1888 (obviously wrong) Height: 5 feet 6 inches</p>
<p>Forehead; medium, Eyes normal, dark Nose: broad mouth normal</p>
<p>Chin normal Colour of hair black Complexion olive Face oval</p>
<p>Any special peculiarities smallpox marks</p>
<p>Normal Status British-India-born subject-Hindu Brahmin Son of Mr. Srinivasa Aiyangar of kumbakonam, Tanjore</p>
</li>
<li>
<h4>Milestones in Ramanujan&#39;s Life</h4>
</li>
</ol>
<p>(Courtesy: website of Ramanujan Museum Chennai)</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<table>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1887</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Dec. 22 Born at Erode</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1892</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Enrolled in the Thinnai Palli Koodam (Pial school)</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1894</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Enrolled in Kangeyam Primary School, Kumbakonam.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1897</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Stood first in the Tanjore District Primary examination.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1898</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Joined Town High School, Kumbokanam, I Form.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1900</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>In III form, had studied by himself Algebra, Geometric</p>
<p>series, Loney&#39;s Part II Trigonometry</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1903</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>In VI form, obtained G.S.Carr&#39; s: A Synopsis of</p>
<p>Elementary Results,</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1904</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Passed Matriculation examination and joined Government</p>
<p>Arts College in Kumbakonam for FA, had a scholarship.</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Srinivasa Ramanujan // 149</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<table>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1905</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Failed in English, not promoted to senior F.A. class, lost</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1906</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>his scholarship.</p>
<p>Joined Pachaiappa&#39;s College, he fell ill and discontinued</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1907</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>studies.</p>
<p>Studied privately for F.A., Failed</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1909</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>July 14, Married 9 year old Janaki Ammal.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1911</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>His first paper published in the Journal of Indian</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1912</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Mathematical Society.</p>
<p>Scholarship of Rs.20 per month. Mar. 01 Joined</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Madras Port Trust in the Account Section in Class III,</p>
<p>Grade IV on Rs.30 per month. Wrote to Hill, Baker and</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1913</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Hobson</p>
<p>Jan. 16 Wrote his first letter to G.H.Hardy,</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1914</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Jan. 14 Ramanujan expressed his willingness to leave</p>
<p>for Cambridge.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Mar. 17 Sailed to England by SS Nevasa. April. 14</p>
<p>Arrived in London,</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1915</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Worked on Arithmetic Functions</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1916</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Mar. 15 Ramanujan was conferred upon, B.A., degree</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>by research.</p>
<p>Fell ill and hospitalized in Sanatoria at Wells, Matlock</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1917</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>and London.</p>
<p>Showed improvement and resumed active work.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1918</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Feb. 28 Elected Fellow of the Royal Society.</p>
<p>Admitted as a Fellow to Trinity</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1919</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Preparation to return to India.</p>
<p>Mar. 13 Left England by Nagoya.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Mar. 27 Arrived in India. Ap. 02 Reached Madras by</p>
<p>train.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Aug.12 Moved to Coimbatore on health grounds, Jan.</p>
<p>20 Returned to Madras.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>1920</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Apr. 26 Passed away.</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>150 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<h4>Further Reading</h4>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Robert Kanigel, The Man who knew Infinity, A Life of the Genius Ramanujan, published by Abacus 1991. This makes a most compelling reading and an authoritative source for biographical details.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>David Leavitt, The Indian Clerk, published by Bloomsbury, 2007. This being a novel is more fiction than a biography.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Bruce C. Berndt and Robert A. Rankin, Ramanujan, Letters and Commentary, History of Mathematics, Volume 9, American Mathematical Society and London Mathematical society, 1995. This contains many of the letters written by and to Ramanujan. Many of the extracts of letters found in the present book have been taken from this source.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Bruce C. Berndt and Robert A. Rankin (Editors), Ramanujan: Essays and Surveys, American Mathematical Society, 2001.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>S. R. Ranganathan, Ramanujan, The Man and the Mathematician, Asia publishing House, 1967.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>K. Srinivasa Rao, Srinivasa Ramanujan, a Mathematical Genius, EastWest Books (Madras) Pvt. Ltd., 1998.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>A vast body of literature exists on Ramanujan, his life and achievements in various web sites. Those interested in mathematical details of his work should refer to hundreds of papers that have been published in technical journals. His notebooks are available in the following references.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>S. Ramanujan, Collected Papers, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1927; reprinted by Chelsea, New York, 1962; reprinted by the American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI 2000.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>B. C. Berndt, Ramanujan&#39;s Notebooks, Part I, Springer-Verlag, New York 1985.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>B. C. Berndt, Ramanujan&#39;s Notebooks, Part II, Springer-Verlag, New York 1989.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>B. C. Berndt, Ramanujan&#39;s Notebooks, Part III, Springer-Verlag, New York 1991.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>B. C. Berndt, Ramanujan&#39;s Notebooks, Part IV, Springer-Verlag, New York 1994.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>B. C. Berndt, Ramanujan&#39;s Notebooks, Part V, Springer-Verlag, New York 1998.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>G.E. Andrews and B.C. Berndt, Ramanujan&#39;s Lost Notebook, Part I, Springer, New York, 2005.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>G.E. Andrews and B.C. Berndt, Ramanujan&#39;s Lost Notebook, Part II, Springer, New York, 2009.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Srinivasa Ramanujan // 151</p>
<p>Ramanujan’s First Letter to Hardy</p>
<p>(Reproduced with permission from the American Mathematical Society)</p>
<p>Dear Sir,</p>
<p>I beg to introduce myself to you as a clerk in the Accounts Department of the Port Trust Office at Madras on a salary of only £20 per annum. I am now about 23 years of age. I have had no University education but I have undergone the ordinary school course. After leaving school I have been employing the spare time at my disposal to work at Mathematics. I have not trodden through the conventional regular course which is followed in a University course, but I am striking out a new path for myself. I have made a special investigation of divergent series in general and the results I get are termed by the local mathematicians as ‘startling’.</p>
<p>Just as in elementary mathematics you give a meaning to <i>a</i>n when <i>n </i>is negative and fractional to conform to the law which holds when <i>n </i>is a positive integer, similarly the whole of my investigations proceed on giving a meaning to Eulerian Second Integral for all values of <i>n</i>. My friends who have gone through</p>
<p>the regular course of University education tell me that</p>
<p></p>
<p> xn1ex dx  (n)</p>
<p>0</p>
<p>is true only when <i>n </i>is positive. They say</p>
<p>that this integral relation is not true when is <i>n </i>negative. Supposing this is true only for positive values of <i>n </i>and also supposing the</p>
<p>definition</p>
<p><i>n </i>(<i>n</i>)  (<i>n </i>1)</p>
<p>to be universally true, I have given</p>
<p>meanings to these integrals and under the conditions I state the integral is true for all values of <i>n </i>negative and fractional. My whole investigations are based upon this and I have been developing this to a remarkable extent so much so that the local mathematicians are not able to understand me in my higher flights.</p>
<p>Very recently I came across a tract published by you styled</p>
<p>Orders of Infinity in page 36 of which I find a statement. that</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>152 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>no definite expression has been as yet found for the number of prime numbers less than any given number. I have found an expression which very nearly approximates to the real result, the error being negligible. I would request you to go through the enclosed papers. Being poor, if you are convinced that there is anything of value I would like to have my theorems published. I have not given the actual investigations nor the expressions that I get but I have indicated the lines on which I proceed. Being inexperienced I would very highly value any advice you give me. Requesting to be excused for the trouble I give you.</p>
<p>I remain, Dear Sir, Yours truly,</p>
<p>S. Ramanujan</p>
<p>P.S. My address is S. Ramanujan, Clerk Accounts Department, Port Trust, Madras, India.</p>
<h4>(1)</h4>
<p>In page 36 it is stated that “the number of prime numbers less than</p>
<p> log t</p>
<p>x dt</p>
<p>x  </p>
<p>2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> (<i>x</i>)</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>where the precise of</p>
<p> ( <i>x</i>)</p>
<p>has not been determined.”</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>The precise order itself is not sufficient to find the value</p>
<p>of  ( <i>x</i>) . Even if it is known that</p>
<p> (<i>x</i>)  1</p>
<p> (<i>x</i>)</p>
<p>when <i>x </i>becomes</p>
<p>infinite,</p>
<p> (<i>x</i>)</p>
<p>being a known function of <i>x</i>,</p>
<p> (<i>x</i>)</p>
<p>cannot be</p>
<p>supposed to have been found with sufficient accuracy; for example</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> x   x  </p>
<p> log log x </p>
<p>   1</p>
<p>x</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Srinivasa Ramanujan // 153</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>when <i>x </i>becomes infinite, yet the difference between and <i>x </i>is very great.</p>
<p>x <u> </u><u>x </u></p>
<p>log log <i>x</i></p>
<p>From the forms of</p>
<p> ( <i>x</i>)</p>
<p>given in page 53, viz.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>O  x </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>, O xea</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>log <i>x</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>, <i>O x </i>,</p>
<p>log x </p>
<p> </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>etc. it appears that from particular numerical values the forms have been guessed.</p>
<p>Even in regular functions it is difficult to have an idea of the form from the numerical values. In such a complicated function</p>
<p>as  ( <i>x</i>) it is difficult to have an idea even for large values of</p>
<p>log <i>x</i>; for example even if we give billion for <i>x</i>, difficult to be found.</p>
<p> (<i>x</i>)</p>
<p>is very</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>I have observed that</p>
<p> (<i>e</i>2 <i>x </i>)</p>
<p>is of such a nature that its</p>
<p>value is very small when <i>x </i>lines between 0 and 3 (its value is less than a few hundreds when <i>x </i>= 3) and rapidly increases when <i>x </i>is greater than 3.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>I have found a function which exactly represents the number of prime numbers less than <i>x</i>, ‘exactly’ in the sense that the difference between the function and the actual number of primes is generally 0 or some small finite value even when <i>x </i>becomes infinite.</p>
<h4>(2)</h4>
<p>I have got the fuction in the form of infinite series and have expressed it in two ways.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>In terms of Bernoullian numbers. From this we can easily calculate the number of prime numbers up to 100 millions,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>154 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>with generally no error and in some cases with an error of 1 or 2.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>As a definite integeral from which we can calculate for all values.</p>
</li>
</ol>
</li>
<li>
<p>I have also got expressions to find the actual number of prime numbers of the form <i>An </i>+ <i>B</i>, which are less than any given number however large.</p>
<p>The difference between the number of prime numbers of the form 4<i>n </i>– 1 and which are less than x and those of the form 4<i>n </i>+ 1 less than <i>x </i>is infinite when x becomes infinite.</p>
<p>Theorems connected with the calculation of the difference when <i>x </i>is a given number and similar calculations have also been got.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>I have found out expressions for finding not only irregularly increasing functions but also irregular functions without increase (e.g. the number of difisors of natural numbers), not merely the order but the exact form. The following are a few examples from my theorems:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>The numbers of the form 2p 3q less than <i>n</i></p>
<p>1 log(2<i>n</i>) log(3<i>n</i>)</p>
<p>= 2 log 2 log 3</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>where <i>p </i>and <i>q </i>may have any positive integral value including 0.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<h4>(3)</h4>
</li>
<li>
<p>Let us take all numbers containing an odd number of dissimilar prime divisors, viz.</p>
<p>2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29, 31, 37, 41, 42, 43, 47, ...</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Srinivasa Ramanujan // 155</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>The number of such numbers less than</p>
<p>n <u> 3</u><u>n</u></p>
<p> 2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1  1  1 </p>
<p>22 32 52</p>
<p>1  . . .</p>
<p>72</p>
<p>1 </p>
<p>302</p>
<p>1</p>
<p>312</p>
<p> . . . </p>
<p>9 .</p>
<p>2 2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><u> 1</u> <u> 1</u> <u> 1</u> <u> 1</u>  . . . <u> 15</u> .</p>
<p>22 32</p>
<p>52 72</p>
<p>2 4</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</li>
</ol>
</li>
<li>
<p>Let us take the number of divisors of natural numbers, viz. 1, 2, 2, 3, 2, 4, 2, 4, 3, 4, 2, ... (1 having 1 divisor, 2 having2, 3 having 2, 4 having 3, 5 having 2, ... ). The sum of such numbers of <i>n </i>terms</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>= <i>n</i>(2 1  log <i>n</i>) </p>
<p>1</p>
<p>2 of the number of divisors of n</p>
<p>where  = .5772156649 ..., the Eulerian Constant.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(4) 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 13, 16, 17, 18, ... are numbers which are either themselves squares or which can be expressed as the sum of two squares.</p>
<p>The number of such numbers greater than <i>A </i>and less than <i>B</i>.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>B</p>
<p> K </p>
<p>A</p>
<p><i>dx </i> (<i>x</i>) log <i>x</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>where <i>K </i>= .764... and ( x)</p>
<p>is very small when compared with</p>
<p>the previous integral. <i>K </i>and complicated.</p>
<p>(<i>x</i>) have been exactly found though</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>156 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</li>
</ol>
</li>
<li>
<p>Theorems on integrals. The following are a few examples.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> x 2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> x 2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> x 2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> 1   <i>b </i>1 1   <i>b </i> 2  1  <i>b </i> 3 </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>(1)  2 2 2 ... <i>dx</i></p>
<p>0 1  x  1   x  1  x </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p> a </p>
<p> </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>a  1</p>
<p> <i>a </i>1 </p>
<p>(b 1)</p>
<p> <i>a </i> 2 </p>
<p> b  a  1</p>
<p> 2 2</p>
<p>2</p>
<p>2  (<i>a</i>)  <i>b </i> 1  (<i>b </i> <i>a </i> 1)</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(2)</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>b1</p>
<p> 1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>dx</p>
<p> <i>x</i><i> </i>2   <i>x</i><i> </i>2  <i>x</i><i> </i>2 </p>
<p> <i>x</i><i> </i>2   <i>x</i><i> </i>2 </p>
<p></p>
<p>a 1</p>
<p>a 2</p>
<p></p>
<p>0 1 <i>a</i></p>
<p> 1</p>
<p> </p>
<p>1</p>
<p></p>
<p>.. .</p>
<p></p>
<p>1 <i>b</i></p>
<p> 1</p>
<p> </p>
<p> . . .</p>
<p></p>
<p>  a 1</p>
<p>b 1 </p>
<p> 2</p>
<p> 2   <i>a </i><i>b</i></p>
<p>  </p>
<p>2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> <u><i> </i></u><u><i> con nx </i></u><i> dx </i> (<i>n</i>),</p>
<p> (<i>a</i>)</p>
<p>(<i>b</i>)</p>
<p> a b 1</p>
<p>2</p>
<p>(3) 0</p>
<p>e2 p x  1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> sin nx</p>
<p>1  2 </p>
<p>23</p>
<p>then</p>
<p> 2</p>
<p>e</p>
<p>dx</p>
<p>x  1</p>
<p> (<i>n</i>)  2<i>n </i>  <b> </b><i>n </i><b> </b><i>n</i>3</p>
<p>0  </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(<i>n</i>) is a complicated function. The following are certain special</p>
<p>values.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(<i>n</i>)  1 ;</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>    1 ;</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>()  2 </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>2 ; (2)  1 ;</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>2</p>
<p> </p>
<p>12   4</p>
<p>8 16</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> 2   8  3 5 ;     6  5  5 10 ;</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>()  0 ;</p>
<p> 5  16  5  4 8</p>
<p> 2   1 </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>3  3  1 </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p> 3  3</p>
<p> 16 8 </p>
<p>   </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Srinivasa Ramanujan // 157</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> dx</p>
<p>0</p>
<p>(4)  (1  <i>x</i>2 ) (1 <i>r </i>2 <i>x</i>2 )(1 <i>r </i>4 <i>x</i>2 )(1 <i>r </i>6 <i>x</i>2)...</p>
<p> </p>
<p>2(1 <i>r </i> <i>r</i>3  <i>r</i>6  <i>r</i>10  ...)</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>where 1, 3, 6, 10, ... are sums of natural numbers.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(5)</p>
<p>sin 2<i>nx </i><i>dx</i></p>
<p></p>
<p></p>
<p>0 x(cosh x  cosx)</p>
<p>  <i>e</i><i>n </i>cos <i>n e</i>3<i>n </i>cos 3<i>n e</i>5<i>n </i>cos5<i>n </i></p>
<p> 4  2 </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>cosh </p>
<ul>
<li>
<p>3cosh 3</p>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>
<p>5cosh 5</p>
<p> ...</p>
<p> 2 2 2 </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>  2nz dz</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>(6)</p>
<p> tan</p>
<p>0</p>
<p><i>n</i>2  <i>x</i>2  <i>z </i>2</p>
<p>e2z  1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>can be exactly found if 2<i>n </i>is any integer and <i>x </i>any quantity.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<h4>(5)</h4>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Theorems on summation of series; e.g.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(1)</p>
<p>1  1 </p>
<p></p>
<p>1  1</p>
<p></p>
<p> 1  1 </p>
<p></p>
<p>1  1</p>
<p></p>
<p> ...</p>
<p>13 21</p>
<p>23 22</p>
<p>33 23</p>
<p>43 24</p>
<p> 1 3 2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p> 1 1 1 </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>(log 2)</p>
<p>6</p>
<p> 12 log 2   13  33  53  ...</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> 1 4</p>
<p> 1 5 4</p>
<p> 1 5  9 4 2 2</p>
<p>(2)</p>
<p>1  9   4 </p>
<p> 17  4  8 </p>
<p> 25   4  8 12 </p>
<p> ... </p>
<p> {(<u> </u>3 )}2</p>
<p>      4</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>158 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(3)</p>
<p> 1 3</p>
<p>1 5  2 </p>
<p> 1 3 3</p>
<p> 9   2  4 </p>
<p> ...  2</p>
<p></p>
<p>   </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>113 </p>
<p><i>e</i>2 1</p>
<p>213</p>
<p><i>e</i>4 1</p>
<p> 313</p>
<p><i>e</i>6 1</p>
<p> . . .  1</p>
<p>24</p>
<p>coth   coth 2  coth 3   197</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>(5)</p>
<p>17 27</p>
<p>...</p>
<p>37 56700</p>
<p><u> 1</u> <u> 1</u> <u> 1</u>   5</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(6)</p>
<p>15 cosh </p>
<p>35 cosh 3</p>
<p>55 cosh 5</p>
<p>...</p>
<p>768</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(7)</p>
<p>2 2 2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><u> 1</u> <u> 1</u> (12  22 )(sinh 3  sinh ) (22  32) (sinh 5  sinh )</p>
<p> 1</p>
<p>(32  42 ) (sinh 7  sinh )</p>
<p> ...</p>
<p> 1  1  coth    tanh2  </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>2sinh    2 2 </p>
<p> </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(8)</p>
<p>1</p>
<p>25  14</p>
<p></p>
<p>(<i>e</i> 1) 25  34</p>
<p>3 </p>
<p>(<i>e</i>3 1)</p>
<p>100 100</p>
<p>5  ...</p>
<p>  coth2 5 </p>
<p>4689</p>
<p>25 </p>
<p>54</p>
<p>100</p>
<p>(<i>e</i>5  1)</p>
<p>8 2 11890</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><u> 1</u> <u> 1</u>   7</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(9)</p>
<p>17 cosh 1  3 37 cosh 3 3</p>
<p>...</p>
<p>23040</p>
<p>2 2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>  n 3    n 3  </p>
<p> n 3 </p>
<p>(10)</p>
<p>1   1   1   2 </p>
<p> 1   3   ...</p>
<p>  </p>
<p> </p>
<p>   </p>
<p>  </p>
<p>can always be exactly found if <i>n </i>is any integer positive or negative.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Srinivasa Ramanujan // 159</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>2 1 tan1 <i>x </i>2 3 tan1 <i>x </i></p>
<p>(11)</p>
<p>3 0 <i>x</i></p>
<p>dx  0</p>
<p>dx  log (2 </p>
<p>x 12</p>
<p>3).</p>
<h4>(6)</h4>
</li>
<li>
<p>Theorems on transformation of series and integrals, e.g.</p>
<p>(1)</p>
<p> 1  1  1  1</p>
<p> ...</p>
<p><b> </b>2 1  3 3  5 5  7 </p>
<p> </p>
<p> 1  1  1  ...</p>
<p>1 1 3 3 5 5</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(2) log1  log 3  log 5  log 7  ... 1 3 5 7</p>
<p>  1   1   1 log 2  1  1  1  </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p> 4 2 2</p>
<p>  1 3 5</p>
<p>...,</p>
<p>   </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>where  = .5772 ..., the Eulerian constant.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>x23! x2 6! x6 9!</p>
<p>1  (1!2!)3  (2!4!)3  (3!6!)3  ...</p>
<p>(3)</p>
<p> </p>
<p>x x2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> </p>
<p>x x2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1  (1!)3  (2!)3  ... 1 (1!)3  (2!)3  ...</p>
<p>  </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>If</p>
<p>a</p>
<p> ( <i>p</i>, <i>x</i>) cos <i>nx dx </i>  ( <i>p</i>,<i>n</i>),</p>
<p>0</p>
<p> a </p>
<p>then,</p>
<p> ( <i>p</i>, <i>x</i>) (<i>q</i>, <i>nx</i>) <i>dx </i>  (<i>q</i>, <i>x</i>) ( <i>p</i>, <i>nx</i>) <i>dx</i></p>
<p>2</p>
<p>0 0</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>160 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If   , then</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> e <i>x</i>2  e<i>x</i>2</p>
<p>0 0</p>
<p>  cosh <i>x </i><i>dx </i>   cosh <i>x</i></p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If   2, then</p>
<p>1 </p>
<p> xex2</p>
<p> 1 </p>
<p> xex2</p>
<p>4  1  4  <i>e</i>2x  1 <i>dx</i>  4  1 4  <i>e</i>2x</p>
<ul>
<li>
<p>1 <i>dx</i></p>
</li>
</ul>
<p> 0   0</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>n  en2  e</p>
<p>1 n2</p>
<p>5</p>
<p>1 n2</p>
<p>e</p>
<p>5</p>
<p></p>
<p></p>
<p> ...</p>
<p> 3 3 5 5 </p>
<p> </p>
<p>  (en x sin n</p>
<p>  en</p>
<p>3 sin n</p>
<p>3  ...).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If <i>n </i>is any positive integer excluding 0,</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>14n</p>
<p>(<i>e</i>  <i>e</i> )2</p>
<p> 24n</p>
<p>(e2  e2 )2</p>
<p> 34n</p>
<p>(e3  e3 )2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> ...</p>
<p></p>
<p> <u><i>n</i></u><i> </i> <i>B</i>4<i>n </i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>14 <i>n</i>1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> 24<i>n</i>1 </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>34<i>n</i>1  </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>  8<i>n </i><i>e</i>2 1</p>
<p><i>e</i>4 1</p>
<p><i>e</i>6 1</p>
<p>...</p>
<p></p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>where</p>
<p><i>B </i> 1 ,</p>
<p>2 6</p>
<p>B4  30</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1</p>
<p>, ...</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<h4>(7)</h4>
</li>
<li>
<p>Theorems on approximate integration and summation of series.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(1)</p>
<p>12 log1  22 log 2  33 log 3  ... </p>
<p>x2 log x</p>
<p> 1 <i>x </i>(<i>x </i> 1)(2<i>x </i>1) log <i>x</i></p>
<p> 1 <i>x</i>3 </p>
<p>1  1  1</p>
<p></p>
<p> 1  ...</p>
<p>6 9 42  13 23 33 </p>
<p> x  1</p>
<p> ...</p>
<p>12 360<i>x</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Srinivasa Ramanujan // 161</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>x x2 x3</p>
<p>xx ex</p>
<p>(2) 1     ...   </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>where</p>
<p>1! 2! 3!</p>
<p>  1  4</p>
<p>x! 2</p>
<p>8</p>
<p>where <i>k </i>lies between</p>
<p>2</p>
<p>and .</p>
<p>3 135(<i>x </i> <i>k </i>)</p>
<p>45 21</p>
<p> x 5</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> x2 5</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> x3 5</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>5 <i>e</i>5x</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(3)</p>
<p>1   1! </p>
<p> <b> </b>2! </p>
<p> <b> </b>3! </p>
<p> ... </p>
<p>42 . 5<i>x</i>2  <i>x </i> 0</p>
<p>     </p>
<p>where  vanishes when <i>x </i>  .</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(4)</p>
<p>12 </p>
<p>ex 1</p>
<p>22 </p>
<p>e2x  1</p>
<p>32</p>
<p>e3x  1</p>
<p> 42</p>
<p>e4x  1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> ...</p>
<p> 2  1  1</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p> 1  ...</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>x3  13 23 33 </p>
<p> </p>
<p> 1  x</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>x3</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>x5</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>x7</p>
<p> ...</p>
<p>12<i>x </i>1440 181440 7257600 159667200</p>
<p>when <i>x </i>is small. (Note: <i>x </i>may be given values from 0 to 2.)</p>
<p><u> 1</u> <u> 1</u> <u> 3</u>  42</p>
<p> 53</p>
<p>(5)</p>
<p>1001 10022 10033 10044</p>
<p>10055</p>
<p> 1</p>
<p>1000</p>
<p> 10440 1.0125 nearly.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>a 2 </p>
<p>ea2</p>
<p>1 2 3 4</p>
<p>(6)</p>
<p> e x</p>
<p>dx        ...</p>
<p>0 2 2<i>a a </i>2<i>a a </i>2<i>a</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(7) The coefficient of <i>x</i>n in</p>
<p>1</p>
<p>1  2<i>x </i> 2<i>x</i>4  2<i>x</i>9  2<i>x</i>16  ....</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1 cosh(</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p><i>n</i><i> </i>)  sinh( <i>n </i>) .</p>
<p>= the nearest integer to</p>
<p>4<i>n </i></p>
<p> n </p>
<p> </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>162 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<h4>(9)</h4>
<p>IX. Theorems on continued fractions, a few examples are:</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>4 12</p>
<p>32 52 72</p>
<p> </p>
<p>x1 2</p>
<p>(1)</p>
<p>...  <u> </u>4 </p>
<p></p>
<p>x  2x  2x  2x  2x </p>
<p> </p>
<p>x3 4</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>If P =</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> 1 (<i>x </i> <i>m </i> <i>n </i> 1)  1 (<i>x </i> <i>m </i> <i>n </i> 1)  1 (<i>x </i> <i>m </i> <i>n </i> 3)  1 (<i>x </i> <i>m </i> <i>n </i> 3)</p>
<p>4 4 4 4 ,</p>
<p><u> </u>1 (<i>x </i> <i>m </i> <i>n </i> 1) <u> </u>1 (<i>x </i> <i>m </i> <i>n </i> 1)  1 (<i>x </i> <i>m </i> <i>n </i> 3) <u> </u>1 ( <i>x </i> <i>m </i> <i>n </i> 3)</p>
<p>4 4 4 4</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>then</p>
<p>1  <i>P </i> <i>m</i></p>
<p>1  <i>P x </i></p>
<p>11  <i>n</i>2</p>
<p>x </p>
<p>22  <i>m</i>2 <i>x</i></p>
<p>32  <i>n</i>2</p>
</li>
</ol>
</li>
<li>
<p>x</p>
<p>42  <i>m</i>2</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>x</p>
<p> ...</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> 1 2  1 3 2 2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>If</p>
<p><i>z </i> 1   2 </p>
<p>  2  4 </p>
<p>x  ...,</p>
<p>   </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>2</p>
<p> 1 1 (1 <i>x</i>)  13 2 (1  <i>x</i>)2  ...</p>
<p>and</p>
<p>y  2 24</p>
<p>2 1  1 2 <i>x </i> 13 2 <i>x</i>2  ...</p>
<p>2 24</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>then</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1</p>
<p>(1  <i>a</i>2 )cosh <i>y</i></p>
<p> 1</p>
<p>(1  9<i>a</i>2 ) cosh 3 <i>y</i></p>
<p> 1</p>
<p>(1  25<i>a</i>2 ) cosh 5 <i>y</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> ...</p>
<p> 1 <i>z x </i>(<i>az</i>)2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(2<i>az</i>)2 <i>x </i>(3<i>az</i>)2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>(4<i>az</i>)2 <i>x</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>2 1  1 </p>
<p>1  1 </p>
<p>1  ...,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>a being any quantity.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>x x5</p>
<p>x10 x15</p>
<p>x20</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If</p>
<p>u  1  1 </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>1  1</p>
<p> 1  . . .</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Srinivasa Ramanujan // 163</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>5 x x x2 x3</p>
<p>and</p>
<p><i>v </i> 1  1  1  1</p>
<p> ...,</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>then</p>
<p>5  1 2<i>u </i> 4<i>u </i>2  3<i>u</i>3  <i>u</i>4</p>
<p></p>
<p><i>v </i><i> u </i>. 1 3<i>u </i> 4<i>u </i>2  2<i>u</i>3  <i>u </i>4</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1 e2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>e4</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>e6</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> 5 5</p>
<p>5  1  5 2</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1  1</p>
<p> 1  1</p>
<p>... </p>
<p> </p>
<p>2  2  e</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>1 <i>e</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p>e2</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>e3</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p> 5 5</p>
<p>5  1  5 2</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1  1  1</p>
<p>...  </p>
<p> 1 </p>
<p>2  2  e</p>
<p> </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>1 <i>e</i> n</p>
<p>1  1</p>
<p>e2 n</p>
<p> 1</p>
<p>e3</p>
<p> 1</p>
<p>n</p>
<p>...</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>can be exactly found if <i>n </i>be any positive rational quantity.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<h4>(11)</h4>
<p>XI. I have got theorems on divergent series, theorems to calculate the comvergent values corresponding to the divergent series, viz.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1 2  3  4  ...  1 ,</p>
<p>4</p>
<p>11! 2! 3! ...  .596...,</p>
<p>1 2  3  4...</p>
<p>  1 ,</p>
<p>12</p>
<p>13  23  33  43 ... </p>
<p>1 .</p>
<p>120</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>164 <i>// Srinivasa Ramanujan</i></p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>Theorems to calculate such values for any given series (say 1 – 11 + 22 – 33 + 44 – 55 + ...), and the meaning of such values.</p>
<p>I have also dealt with such questions ‘When to use, where to use, and how to use such values, where do they fail and where do they not ?’</p>
<p>I have also given meanings to the fractional and negative number of terms in a series as well as in a product and I have got theorems to calculate such values exactly and approximately. Many wonderful results have been got from such theorems; e.g.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>1  1 2 1</p>
<p> 1 3 2 1</p>
<p> 1 3  5 2 1</p>
<p><i>n </i>  2 </p>
<p><i>n </i> 1   2  4 </p>
<p><i>n </i> 2   2  4  6 </p>
<p> ...</p>
<p>n  3</p>
<p>     </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
<p></p>
<p> (<i>n</i>)</p>
<p>2 </p>
<p> 1 2</p>
<p> 1 3 2</p>
<p> </p>
<p><u> </u><u> </u>     </p>
<p>(<i>n </i> 1  1  2 </p>
<p></p>
<p> 2  4 </p>
<ul>
<li>
<p>... to <i>n </i>terms .</p>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
<p> 2   </p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>It is even possible to find the true value in the cases in which the use of divergent series fails by finding the diff[eren]ce between the true and apparent values.</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p></p>
</body>
</html>
