<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>How to Stop Worrying And Start Living</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-p1.001">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">1</span>How to Analyse and Solve Worry Problems</h1>
		<p>Will any magic formula solve all worry problems? No, of course not.</p>
		<p>Then what <em>is</em> the answer? The answer is that we must equip ourselves to deal with different kinds of worries by learning the three basic steps of problem analysis. The three steps are:</p>
		<ul>
			<li>Get the facts.</li>
			<li>Analyse the facts.</li>
			<li><span>Arrive at a decision—and then act on that decision.</span></li>
		</ul>
		<p>Obvious stuff? Yes, Aristotle taught it-and used it. And you and I must use it too if we are going to solve the problems that are harassing us and turning our days and nights into veritable hells.</p>
		<p>Let’s take the first rule: <em>Get the facts</em>. Why is it so important to get the facts? Because unless we have the facts we can’t possibly even attempt to solve our problem intelligently. Without the facts, all we can do is stew around in confusion. My idea? No, that was the idea of the late Herbert E. Hawkes, Dean of Columbia College, Columbia University, for 22 years. He had helped 200000 students solve their worry problems; and he told me that ‘c<em>onfusion is the chief cause of worry</em>’. He put it this way—he said: ‘Half the worry in the world is caused by people trying to make decisions before they have sufficient knowledge on which to base a decision. For example, he said, ‘if I have a problem which has to be faced at three o’clock next Tuesday, I refuse even to try to make a decision about it until next Tuesday arrives. In the meantime, I concentrate on getting all the facts that bear on the problem. I don’t worry,’ he said, ‘I don’t agonise over my problem. I don’t lose any sleep. I simply concentrate on getting the facts. And by the time Tuesday rolls around, if I’ve got all the facts, the problem usually solves itself!’</p>
		<p>I asked Dean Hawkes if this meant he had licked worry entirely. ‘Yes,’ he said, ‘I think I can honestly say that my life is now almost totally devoid of worry. I have found,’ he went on, ‘that if a man will devote his time to securing facts in an impartial, objective way, his worries usually evaporate in the light of knowledge’.</p>
		<p><em>Let me repeat that: ‘If a man will devote his time to securing facts in an impartial, objective way, his worries will usually evaporate in the light of knowledge’.</em></p>
		<p>But what do most of us do ? If we bother with facts at all—and Thomas Edison said in all seriousness: ‘There is no expedient to which a man will not resort to avoid the labour of thinking’—if we bother with facts at all, we hunt like bird dogs after the facts that bolster up what we <em>already</em> think—and ignore all the others! We want only the facts that justify our acts—the facts that fit in conveniently with our wishful thinking and justify our preconceived prejudices!</p>
		<p>Is it any wonder, then, that we find it so hard to get at the answers to our problems? Wouldn’t we have the same trouble trying to solve a second-grade arithmetic problem, if we went ahead on the assumption that two plus two equals five? Yet there are a lot of people in this world who make life a hell for themselves and others by insisting that two plus two equals five—or may be 500!</p>
		<p>What can we do about it? We have to keep our emotions out of our thinking; and, as Dean Hawkes put it, we must secure the facts in ‘an impartial, objective’ manner. That is not an easy task when we are worried. When we are worried, our emotions are riding high. But here are two ideas that I have found helpful when trying to step aside from my problems, in order to see the facts in a clear, objective manner.</p>
		<p>1. When trying to get the facts, I pretend that I am collecting this information not for myself, but for some other person. This helps me to take a cold, impartial view of the evidence. This helps me eliminate my emotions.</p>
		<p>2. While trying to collect the facts about the problem that is worrying me, I sometimes pretend that I am a lawyer preparing to argue the other side of the issue. In other words, I try to get all the facts against myself-all the facts that are damaging to my wishes, all the facts I don’t like to face.</p>
		<p>Then I write down both—my side of the case and the other side of the case—and I generally find that the truth lies somewhere in between these two extremities.</p>
		<p>Here is the point I am trying to make. Neither you nor I nor Einstein nor the Supreme Court of the United States is brilliant enough to reach an intelligent decision on any problem without first getting the facts. Thomas Edison knew that. At the time of his death, he had 2500 notebooks filled with facts about the problems he was facing.</p>
		<p>So Rule one for solving our problems is: <em>Get the facts</em>. Let’s do what Dean Hawkes did—let’s not even attempt to solve our problems without first collecting all the facts in an impartial manner.</p>
		<p>However, getting all the facts in the world won’t do us any good until we analyse them and interpret them.</p>
		<p>I have found from costly experience that it is much easier to analyse the facts after writing them Sown. In fact, merely writing the facts on a piece of paper and stating our problem clearly goes a long way toward helping us to reach a sensible decision. As Charles Kettering puts it: ‘A problem well stated is a problem half solved’.</p>
		<p>Let me show you all this as it works out in practice. Since the Chinese say one picture is worth 10000 words, suppose I show you a picture of how one man put exactly what we are talking about into concrete action.</p>
		<p>Let’s take the case of Galen Litchfield—a man I have known for several years; one of the most successful American businessmen in the Far East. Mr. Litchfield was in China in 1942, when the Japanese invaded Shanghai. And here is his story as he told it to me while he was a guest in my home: ‘Shortly after the Japs took Pearl Harbour,’ Galen Litchfield began, ‘they came swarming into Shanghai. I was the manager of the Asia Life Insurance Company in Shanghai. They sent us an ‘army liquidator’ —he was really an admiral—and gave me orders to assist this man in liquidating our assets. I didn’t have any choice in the matter. I could cooperate—or else. And the ‘or else’ was certain death.</p>
		<p>I went through the motions of doing what I was told, because I had no alternative. But there was one block of securities, worth $750,000, which I left off the list I gave to the admiral. I left that block of securities off the list because they belonged to our Hong Kong organisation and had nothing to do with the Shanghai assets. All the same, I feared I might be in hot water if the Japs found out what I had done. And they soon found out.</p>
		<p>I wasn’t in the office when the discovery was made, but my head accountant was there. He told me that the Jap admiral flew into a rage, and stamped and swore, and called me a thief and a traitor! I had defied the Japanese Army! I knew what that meant. I would be thrown into the Bridge house!</p>
		<p>The Bridge house! The torture chamber of the Japanese Gestapo! I had had personal friends who had killed themselves rather than be taken to that prison. I had had other friends who had died in that place after ten days of questioning and torture. Now I was slated for the Bridge house myself!</p>
		<p>What did I do? I heard the news on Sunday afternoon. I suppose I should have been terrified. And I would have been terrified if I hadn’t had a definite technique for solving my problems. For years, whenever I was worried I had always gone to my typewriter and written down two questions—and the answers to these questions:</p>
		<p><em>1. What am I worrying about? </em></p>
		<p><em>2. What can I do about it?</em></p>
		<p>I used to try to answer those questions without writing them down. But I stopped that years ago. I found that writing down both the questions and the answers clarifies my thinking. So, that Sunday afternoon, I went directly to my room at the Shanghai Y.M.C.A, got out my typewriter and wrote:</p>
		<p>1. What am I worrying about?</p>
		<p>I am afraid I will be thrown into the Bridge house tomorrow morning.</p>
		<p>Then I typed out the second question:</p>
		<p>2. What can I do about it?</p>
		<p>I spent hours thinking out and writing down the four courses of action I could take—and what the probable consequence of each action would be.</p>
		<p>I can try to explain to the Japanese admiral. But he ‘does not speak English’. If I try to explain to him through an interpreter, I may stir him up again. That might mean death, for he is cruel, would rather dump me in the Bridge house than bother talking about it.</p>
		<p>I can try to escape. Impossible. They keep track of me all the time. I have to check in and out of my room at the Y.M.C.A. If I try to escape, I’ll probably be captured and shot.</p>
		<p><span>I can stay here in my room and not go near the office </span><span>again. If I do, the Japanese admiral will be suspicion, will </span><span>probably send soldiers to get me and throw me into the Bridge-house without giving me a chance to say a word.</span></p>
		<p>I can go down to the office as usual on Monday morning. If I do, there is a chance that the Japanese admiral may be so busy that he will not think of what I did. Even if he does think of it, he may have cooled off and may not bother me. If this happens, I am all right. Even if he does bother me, I’ll still have a chance to try to explain to him. So, going down to the office as usual on Monday morning, and acting as if nothing had gone wrong gives me two chances to escape the Bridge-house.</p>
		<p>As soon as I thought it all out and decided to accept the fourth plan—to go down to the office as usual on Monday morning—I felt immensely relieved.</p>
		<p>When I entered the office the next morning, the Japanese admiral sat there with a cigarette dangling from his mouth. He glared at me as he always did; and said nothing. Six weeks later—thank God—he went back to Tokyo and my worries were ended.</p>
		<p>As I have already said, I probably saved my life by sitting down that Sunday afternoon and writing out all the various steps I could take and then writing down the probable consequences of each step and calmly coming to a decision. If I hadn’t done that, I might have floundered and hesitated and done the wrong thing on the spur of the moment. If I hadn’t thought out my problem and come to a decision, I would have been frantic with worry all Sunday afternoon. I wouldn’t have slept that night. I would have gone down to the office Monday morning with a harassed and worried look; and that alone might have aroused the suspicion of the Japanese admiral and spurred him to act.</p>
		<p>Experience has proved to me, time after time, the enormous value of arriving at a decision. It is the failure to arrive at a fixed purpose, the inability to stop going round and round in maddening circles, that drives men to nervous breakdowns and living hells. I find that 50 percent of my worries vanishes once I arrive at a clear, definite decision; and another 40 percent usually vanishes once I start to carry out that decision.</p>
		<p>So I banish about 90 percent of my worries by taking these four steps:</p>
		<ol>
			<li>Writing down precisely what I am worrying about.</li>
			<li>Writing down what I can do about it.</li>
			<li>Deciding what to do.</li>
			<li>Starting immediately to carry out that decision.</li>
		</ol>
		<p>Galen Litchfield is now the Far Eastern Director for Starr, Park and Freeman, Inc., III John Street, New York, representing large insurance and financial interests.</p>
		<p>In fact, as I said before, Galen Litchfield today is one of the most important American business men in Asia; and he confesses to me that he owes a large part of his success to this method of analysing worry and meeting it head-on.</p>
		<p>Why is his method so superb? Because it is efficient, concrete, and goes directly to the heart of the problem. On top of all that, it is climaxed by the third and indispensable rule: <em>Do something about it</em>. Unless we carry out our action, all our fact-finding and analysis is whistling upwind—it’s a sheer waste of energy.</p>
		<p>William James said this: ‘When once a decision is made and execution is the order of the day, dismiss absolutely all responsibility and care about the outcome’. (In this case, William James undoubtedly used the word ‘care’ as a synonym for ‘anxiety’.) He meant—once you have made a careful decision based on facts, <em>go</em> into action. Don’t stop to reconsider. Don’t begin to hesitate worry and retrace your steps. Don’t lose yourself in self-doubting which begets other doubts. Don’t keep looking back over your shoulder.</p>
		<p>Why don’t you employ Galen Litchfield’s technique to one of your worries right now? </p>
		<p>Question No. 1—<em>What am I worrying about? (Please write the answer to that question in the space below.)</em></p>
		<p>Question No. 2—<em>What can I do about it? (Please write your answer to that question in the space below.)</em></p>
		<p> Question No. 3—<em>Here is what I am going to do about it.</em></p>
		<p>Question No. 4—<em>When am I going to start doing it?</em></p><br />
		<p class="text-center"><strong>‘Worry does not empty tomorrow of its sorrow, it empties today of its strength’.</strong></p>
		<p class="quote-author"><em> Leo Buscaglia</em></p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
