<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>How to Stop Worrying And Start Living</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-p1.003">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">3</span>‘70 Percent of All Our Worries’</h1>
		<p>If I knew how to solve everybody’s financial worries, I wouldn’t be writing this book, I would be sitting in the White House—right beside the President. But here is one thing I can do: I can quote some authorities on this subject and make some highly practical suggestions and point out where you can obtain books and pamphlets that will give you additional guidance.</p>
		<p>70 percent of all our worries, according to a survey made by the Ladies’ Home Journal, are about money. George Gallup, of the Gallup Poll, says that his research indicates that most people believe that they would have no more financial worries if they could increase their income by only ten percent. That is true in many cases, but in a surprisingly large number of cases it is <em>not</em> true. For example, while writing this chapter, I interviewed an expert on budgets: Mrs. Elsie Stapleton—a woman who spent years as financial adviser to the customers and employees of Wanamaker’s Department Store in New York and of Gimbel’s. She has spent additional years as an individual consultant, trying to help people who were frantic with worry about money. She has helped people in all kinds of income brackets, all the way from a porter who earned less than a thousand dollars a year to an executive earning 100,000 dollars a year. And this is what she told me: ‘More money is <em>not</em> the answer to most people’s financial worries. In fact, I have often seen it happen that an increase in income accomplished nothing but an increase in spending-and an increase in headaches. What causes most people to worry,’ she said, ‘is not that <em>they haven’t enough money, but that they don’t know how to spend the money they have!’</em> ... You snorted at that last sentence, didn’t you? Well, before you snort again, please remember that Mrs. Stapleton did <em>not say</em> that was true of <em>all</em> people. She said: <em>‘most people’</em>. She didn’t mean you. She meant your sisters and your cousins, whom you reckon by the dozens. </p>
		<p>A lot of readers are going to say: ‘I wish this guy Carnegie had my bills to meet, my obligations to keep up—on my weekly salary. If he did, I’ll bet he would change his tune’. Well, I have had my financial troubles: I have worked ten hours a day at hard physical labour in the cornfields and hay barns of Missouri—worked until my one supreme wish was to be free from the aching pains of utter physical exhaustion. I was paid for that grueling work not a dollar an hour, nor 50 cents, nor even ten cents. I was paid five cents an hour for a ten-hour day.</p>
		<p>I know what it means to live for 20 years in houses without a bathroom or running water. I know what it means to sleep in bedrooms where the temperature is 15 degrees below zero. I know what it means to walk miles to save a nickel car-fare and have holes in the bottom of my shoes and patches on the seat of my pants.</p>
		<p>I know what it means to order the cheapest dish on a restaurant menu, and to sleep with my trousers under the mattress because I couldn’t afford to have them pressed by a tailor.</p>
		<p>Yet, even during those times, I usually managed to save a few dimes and quarters out of my income because I was <em>afraid</em> not to. As a result of this experience, I realised that if you and I long to avoid debt and financial worries, then we have to do what a business firm does: we have to have a plan for spending our money and spend according to that plan. But most of us don’t do that.</p>
		<p>Here’s something to consider—<em>where your money is concerned, you’re in business for yourself!</em> And it is literally ‘your business’ what you do with your money.</p>
		<p>But what are the principles of managing our money? How do we begin to make a budget and a plan? Here are 11 rules.</p>
		<p>Rule No. 1: <strong>Get the facts down on paper</strong></p>
		<p>When Arnold Bennett started out in London 50 years ago to be a novelist, he was poor and hard- pressed. So he kept a record of what he did with every sixpence. Did he wonder where his money was going? No. He knew. He liked the idea so much that he continued to keep such a record even after he became rich, world-famous, and had a private yacht.</p>
		<p>You and I, too, will have to get notebooks and start keeping records. For the rest of our lives? No, not necessarily. Experts on budgets recommend that we keep an accurate account of every nickel we spend for at least the first month—and, if possible, for three months. This is to give us an accurate record of where our money goes, so we can draw up a budget.</p>
		<p>Oh, you <em>know</em> where your money goes? Well, may be so; but if you do, you are one in a thousand! Mrs. Stapleton tells me it is a common occurrence for men and women to spend hours giving her facts and figures, so she can get them down on paper—then, when they see the result on paper, they exclaim: ‘Is that the way my money goes?’ They can hardly believe it. Are you like that? Could be.</p>
		<p>Rule No. 2: <strong>Get a tailor-made budget that really fits your needs.</strong></p>
		<p>Mrs. Stapleton tells me that two families may live side by side in identical houses, in the very same suburb, have the same number of children in the family, and receive the same income—yet their budgeting needs will be radically different. Why? Because people are different. She says a budget has to be a personal, custom- made job.</p>
		<p>The idea of a budget is not to wring all the joy out of life. The idea is to give us a sense of material security—which in many cases means emotional security and freedom from worry. ‘People who live on budgets,’ Mrs. Stapleton told me, ‘are happier people’.</p>
		<p>But how do you go about it? First, as I said, you must list all expenses. Then get advice.</p>
		<p>Rule No. 3:<strong> Learn how to spend wisely.</strong></p>
		<p>By this I mean: learn how to get the best value for your money. All large corporations have professional buyers and purchasing agents who do nothing but get the very best buys for their firms. As steward and manager of your personal estate, why shouldn’t you do likewise?</p>
		<p>Rule No. 4: <strong>Don’t increase your headaches with your income.</strong></p>
		<p>Mrs. Stapleton told me that the budgets she dreads most to be called into consultation on are family incomes of 5000 dollars a year. I asked her why. ‘Because,’ she said, ‘5000 a year seems to be a goal to most American families. They may go along sensibly and sanely for years—then, when their income rises to 5000 a year, they think they have ‘arrived’. They start branching out. Buy a house in the suburbs, ‘that doesn’t cost any more than renting an apartment’. Buy a car, a lot of new furniture, and a lot of new clothes—and the first thing you know, they are running into the red. They are actually less happy than they were before—because they have bitten off too much with their increase in income’.</p>
		<p>That is only natural. We all want to get more out of life. But in the long run, which is going to bring us more happiness—forcing ourselves to live within a tight budget, or having dunning letters in the mail and creditors pounding on the front door?</p>
		<p>Rule No. 5: <strong>Try to build credit, in the event you must borrow.</strong></p>
		<p>Be sure your insurance policies have a savings aspect, if you want to borrow on them, for this means a cash value. Certain types of insurance, called ‘term insurance’, are merely for your protection over a given period of time and do not build up reserves. These policies are obviously of no use to you for borrowing purposes. Therefore, the rule is: Ask questions! Before you sign for a policy, find out if it has a cash value in case you have to raise money.</p>
		<p>Now, suppose you haven’t any insurance you can borrow on, and you haven’t any bonds, but you do own a house, or a car, or some other kind of collateral, where do you go to borrow? By all means, to a bank! Banks all over this land are subject to strict regulation; they have a reputation to maintain in the community; the rate of interest they can charge is fixed firmly by law; and they will deal with you fairly. Frequently, if you are in a financial jam, the bank will go so far as to discuss your problems with you, make a plan, and help you work your way out of your worry and indebtedness. I repeat, I repeat, if you have collateral, go to a bank!</p>
		<p>However, suppose you are one of the thousands who don’t have collateral, don’t own any property, and have nothing to offer as guarantee except your wages or salary? Then, as you value your life, heed this word of warning! Do not—<em>do not</em>—apply to the first ‘loan company’ whose alluring advertisements you see in the paper. These people, to read some of their ads, are as generous as Santa Claus. Don’t you believe it! However, there are some companies that are ethical, honest, and strictly on the level. They are doing a service to those people who are faced with illness or emergency and have to raise money. They charge a higher rate of interest than the banks, but they have to do this, for they take greater risks and have greater expenses in collecting. But, before doing business with any loan company, go to your bank, talk to one of its officers, and ask him to recommend a loan company that he knows to be fair. </p>
		<p>Rule No. 6: <strong>Protect yourself against illness, fire, and emergency expenses.</strong></p>
		<p>Insurance is available, for relatively small sums, on all kinds of accidents, misfortunes, and conceivable emergencies. I am not suggesting that you cover yourself for everything from slipping in the bathtub to catching German measles—but I <em>do</em> suggest that you protect yourself against the major misfortunes that you know <em>could</em> cost you money and therefore do cost you worry. It’s cheap at the price.</p>
		<p>For example, I know a woman who had to spend ten days in a hospital last year and, when she came out, was presented a bill—<em>for exactly eight dollars!</em> The answer? She had hospital insurance.</p>
		<p>Rule No. 7: <strong>Do not have your life-insurance proceeds paid to your widow in cash.</strong></p>
		<p>If you are carrying life insurance to provide for your family after you’re gone, do not, I beg of you, have your insurance paid in one lump sum.</p>
		<p>What happens to ‘a new widow with new money’? I’ll let Mrs. Marion S. Eberly answer that question. She is head of the Women’s Division of the Institute of Life Insurance, 60 East 42<sup>nd</sup> Street, New York City. She speaks before women’s clubs all over America on the wisdom of using life-insurance proceeds to purchase a life income for the widow instead of giving her the proceeds in cash. She tells me one widow who received 20000 dollars in cash and lent it to her son to start in the auto- accessory business. The business failed, and she is destitute now. She tells of another widow who was persuaded by a slick real-estate salesman to put most of her life-insurance money in vacant lots that were ‘sure to double in value within a year’. Three years later, she sold the lots for one-tenth of what she paid for them. She tells of another widow who had to apply to the Child Welfare Association for the support of her children—within 12 months after she had been left 15000 dollars in life insurance. A hundred thousand similar tragedies could be told.</p>
		<p>‘The average lifetime of 25000 dollars left in the hands of a woman is less than seven years’. That statement was made by Sylvia S. Porter, financial editor of the <em>New York Post</em>, in the <em>Ladies’ Home Journal</em>.</p>
		<p>Years ago, <em>The Saturday Evening Post</em> said in an editorial: ‘The ease with which the average widow without business training, and with no banker to advise her, can be wheedled into putting her husband’s life-insurance money into wildcat stocks by the first slick salesman who approaches her—is proverbial. Any lawyer or banker can cite a dozen cases in which the entire savings of a thrifty man’s lifetime, amassed by years of sacrifice and self-denial, were swept away simply because a widow or an orphan trusted one of the slick crooks who rob women for a livelihood’.</p>
		<p>If you want to protect your widow and your children, why not take a tip from J. P. Morgan—one of the wisest financiers who ever lived. He left money in his will to 16 principal legatees. 12 were women. Did he leave these women cash? No. He left trust funds that ensured these women a monthly income for life.</p>
		<p>Rule No. 8: <strong>Teach your children a responsible attitude toward money.</strong></p>
		<p>I shall never forget an idea I once read in Your Life magazine. The author, Stella Weston Turtle, described how she was teaching her little girl a sense of responsibility about money. She got an extra cheque-book from the bank and gave it to her nine-year-old daughter. When the daughter was given her weekly allowance, she ‘deposited’ the money with her mother, who served as a bank for the child’s funds. Then, throughout the week, whenever she wanted a cent or two, she ‘drew a cheque’ for that amount and kept track of her balance. The little girl not only found that fun, but began to learn real responsibility in handling her money.</p>
		<p>An excellent method!</p>
		<p>Rule No. 9: <strong>If necessary, make a little extra money off your kitchen stove.</strong></p>
		<p>If after you budget your expenses wisely you still find that you don’t have enough to make ends meet, you can then do any one thing: you can either scold, fret, worry, and complain, or you can plan to make a little additional money on the side. How? Well, all you have to do to make money is to fill an urgent need that isn’t being adequately filled now. That is what Mrs. Nellie Speer, 37-09 83<sup>rd</sup> Street, Jackson Heights, New York, did. In 1932, she found herself living alone in a three-room apartment. Her husband had died, and both her children were married. One day, while having some ice-cream at a drug-store soda fountain, she noticed that the fountain was also selling bakery pies that looked sad and dreary. She asked the proprietor if he would buy some real home-made pies from her. He ordered two. ‘Although I was a good cook,’ Mrs. Speer said, as she told me the story, ‘I had always had servants when we lived in Georgia, and I had never baked more than a dozen pies in my life. After getting that order for two pies, I asked a neighbour woman how to cook an apple—pie. The soda-fountain customers were delighted with my first two home-baked pies, one apple, one lemon. The drugstore ordered five the next day. Then orders gradually came in from other fountains and luncheonettes. Within two years, I was baking 5000 pies a year—I was doing all the work myself in my own tiny kitchen, and I was making a 1000 dollars a year clear, without a penny’s expense except the ingredients that went into the pies’.</p>
		<p>The demand for Mrs. Speer’s home-baked pastry became so great that she had to move out of her kitchen into a shop and hire two girls to bake for her: pies, cakes, bread, and rolls. During the war, people stood in line for an hour at a time to buy her home-baked foods.</p>
		<p>‘I have never been happier in my life,’ Mrs. Speer said. ‘I work in the shop 12 to 14 hours a day, but I don’t get tired because it isn’t work to me. It is an adventure in living. I am doing my part to make people a little happier. I am too busy to be lonesome or worried. My work has filled a gap in my life left vacant by the passing of my mother and husband and my home’.</p>
		<p>When I asked Mrs. Speer if she felt that other women who were good cooks could make money in their spare time in a similar way, in towns of ten thousand and up, she replied: ‘Yes—of course they can!’</p>
		<p>Mrs. Ora Snyder will tell you the same thing. She lives in a town of 30000—Maywood, Illinois. Yet she started in business with the kitchen stove and ten cents’ worth of ingredients. Her husband fell ill. She had to earn money. But how? No experience. No skill. No capital. Just a housewife. She took the white of an egg and sugar and made some candy on the back of the kitchen stove; then she took her pan of candy and stood near the school and sold it to the children for a penny a piece as they went home. ‘Bring more pennies tomorrow,’ she said. ‘I’ll be here every day with my home-made candy’. During the first week, she not only made a profit, but had also put a new zest into living. She was making both herself and the children happy. No time now for worry.</p>
		<p>This quiet little housewife from Maywood, Illinois, was so ambitious that she decided to branch out-to have an agent sell her kitchen-made candy in roaring, thundering Chicago. She timidly approached an Italian selling peanuts on the street. He shrugged his shoulders. His customers wanted peanuts, not candy. She gave him a sample. He liked it, began selling her candy, and made a good profit for Mrs. Snyder on the first day. Four years later, she opened her first store in Chicago. It was only eight feet wide. She made her candy at night and sold it in the daytime. This erstwhile timid housewife, who started her candy factory on her kitchen stove, now has 17 stores—15 of them in the busy Loop district of Chicago.</p>
		<p>Here is the point I am trying to make. Nellie Speer, in Jackson Heights, New York, and Mrs. Ora Snyder, in May-wood, Illinois, instead of worrying about finances, did something positive. They started in an extremely small way to make money off the kitchen stove—no overhead, no rent, no advertising, no salaries. Under these conditions, it is almost impossible for a woman to be defeated by financial worries.</p>
		<p>Look around you. You will find many needs that are not filled. For example, if you train yourself to be a good cook, you can probably make money by starting cooking classes for young girls right in your own kitchen. You can get your students by ringing door-bells.</p>
		<p>Books have been written about how to make money in your spare time; inquire at your public library. There are many opportunities for both men and women. But one word of warning: unless you have a natural gift for selling, don’t attempt door-to-door selling. Most people hate it and fail at it.</p>
		<p>Rule No. 10: <strong>Don’t gamble—ever.</strong></p>
		<p>I am always astounded by the people who hope to make money by betting on the ponies or playing slot machines. I know a man who makes his living by owning a string of these ‘one armed bandits’, and he has nothing but contempt for the foolish people who are so naive as to imagine that they can beat a machine that is already rigged against them.</p>
		<p>I also know one of the best-known bookmakers in America. He was a student in my adult-education classes. He told me that with all his knowledge of horse racing, he couldn’t make money betting on the ponies. Yet the facts are that foolish people bet six billion dollars a year on the races—six times as much as our total national debt back in 1910. This bookmaker also told me that if he had an enemy he despised, he could think of no better way of ruining him than by getting him to bet on the races. When I asked him what would happen to the man who played the races according to the tipster sheets, he replied: ‘You could lose the Mint by betting that way’.</p>
		<p>Rule No. 11: <strong>If we can’t possibly improve our financial situation, let’s be good to ourselves and stop resenting what can’t be changed.</strong></p>
		<p>If we can’t possibly improve our financial situation, may be we can improve our mental attitude towards it. Let’s remember that other people have their financial worries, too. We may be worried because we can’t keep up with the Joneses; but the Joneses are probably worried because they can’t keep up with the Ritzes; and the Ritzes are worried because they can’t keep up with the Vanderbilts.</p>
		<p>Some of the most famous men in American history have had their financial troubles. Both Lincoln and Washington had to borrow money to make the trip to be inaugurated as President.</p>
		<p>If we can’t have all we want, let’s not poison our days and sour our dispositions with worry and resentment. Let’s be good to ourselves. Let’s try to be philosophical about it. ‘If you have what seems to you insufficient,’ said one of Rome’s greatest philosophers, Seneca, ‘then you will be miserable even if you possess the world’.</p>
		<p>And let’s remember this: even if we owned the entire United States with a hog-tight fence around it, we could eat only three meals a day and sleep in only one bed at a time.</p>
		<p>To lessen financial worries, let’s try to follow these 11 rules:</p><br />
		<ul>
			<li>Get the facts down on paper.</li>
			<li>Get a tailor-made budget that really fits your needs!</li>
			<li>Learn how to spend wisely.</li>
			<li>Don’t increase your headaches with your income.</li>
			<li>Try to build credit, in the event you must borrow.</li>
			<li>Protect yourself against illness, fire, and emergency expenses.</li>
			<li>Do not have your life-insurance proceeds paid to your widow in cash.</li>
			<li>Teach your children a responsible attitude towards money.</li>
			<li>If necessary, make a little extra money off your kitchen stove.</li>
			<li>Don’t gambl<span>e</span>—ever.</li>
		</ul>
		<p>If we can’t possibly improve our financial situation, let’s be good to ourselves and stop resenting what can’t be changed.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
