<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Hanuman</title>
	<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000e">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Introduction</h1>
		<p>Hanuman – his very name signifies purity, loyalty, devotion, knowledge, strength. He is also one of the most recognizable gods, depicted as a man with a monkey and tail. Hanuman, who played a major role in rescuing Sita in the epic Ramayana, is a hero whose devotion to Rama is legendary and beyond compare.</p>
		<p>Hanuman is considered as an aspect or embodiment of Lord Shiva. He is one of the most important deities in the Hindu pantheon of gods and is held in great veneration by people across of India. According to Hindu mythology, Hanuman is still alive as he is considered to be one of the seven <em>Chiranjeevis</em> or immortals, and hence is still alive. Devotees of Hanuman believe that by chanting his name, or even by merely thinking of him, they would derive courage and strength to undertake daunting tasks and overcome difficulties.</p>
		<p>Child Hanuman was granted several boons by various Hindu gods. Brahma bestowed upon him the boon of invincibility against all weapons. He also endowed Hanuman with the ability to remove fear from the minds of his friends, to induce fear in the minds of foes, and the capacity to change his form and structure according to will. Shiva gifted him spiritual wisdom, prolonged life and the power to fly across oceans and mountains. Indra blessed him with unconquerable strength and power that would be more potent than his own weapon, the Vajra or thunderbolt. Varuna, Agni, Surya, and Vaayu his own father, gave him special boons that made him indestructible against any power.</p>
		<p>The tales of Hanuman who is an epitome of virtue, compassion, strength and devotion, provide us with some of life’s best lessons. If his selfless service to Rama reveals an aspect of true friendship, it also reflects unwavering faith in the Almighty. His eagerness to help those in need shows his empathetic nature and is symbolic of Truth and Dharma that he stands for.</p>
		<p>Stories of Hanuman describe him as a short-necked vanara with a rotund red face that sparkles with the radiance of rubies. He is portrayed as a benevolent monkey who has flowing tresses that resemble the Ashoka blossom, a tail akin to Indra’s flag and sharp white fang-like teeth. We always hear of Hanuman’s extraordinary power, his ability to change his size to humungous proportions, and above all, of his feats in air, leaping across vast oceans, uprooting entire mountains and bounding high in the skies to reach the planets. In addition to his physical capabilities, Hanuman is depicted as having a scholarly disposition with astonishing understanding and knowledge of the Vedas, Shastras, and the Scriptures. He was also well versed in Sanskrit and its grammar.</p>
		<p>The story of the birth of Hanuman is colourful, fascinating and as interesting as it is varied. A long history is associated with how he came to be born as the son of Anjana and the monkey king Kesari, and the reason why he is also known as Vayuputra, or son of Vayu, the wind god.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>	
