<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>samskrt</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d.1">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Foreword<br /><em>(For the Third Edition)</em></h1>
		<p>Many great souls have encouraged this book. I express my grateful thanks to them.</p>
		<p>Even after the copies of the previous edition have been exhausted the demands for this book have been received. After expressing my sorrow for not being able to provide copies, I beg their pardon.</p>
		<p>For various reasons the printing work got delayed for this edition.</p>
		<p>It has been possible for two new episodes to be added in this edition.</p>
		<p>Similarly, the important names of the individuals have been incorporated in the alphabetical order and those of the citations.</p>
		<p>Sri C. Krishna and Sri S.R. Ramaswamy have whole-heartedly helped in correcting the proofs.</p>
		<p>I have given a lot of trouble to Sri. K. Chidambaram in preparing this book for printing. With his natural friendliness and affection he has borne all difficulties and has helped.</p>
		<p>Bangalore<br />July 1969</p>
		<p class="author"><strong>DVG</strong></p>
	</section>
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d.2">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Foreword<br /><em>(For the Second edition)</em></h1>
		<p>This lecture seems to have met with the approval of the general public. The book reviews have also been in accordance. I thank all of them.</p>
		<p>The Mysore University has accepted this as a Text Book for the B.A. and B.Sc. classes for the year 1957.</p>
		<p>In the opportunity obtained this for re-printing it has been enlarged a little. Since some people suggested that at times the sentences are very cryptic and epigrammatic, in such places one or two words have been added.</p>
		<p>A Radio-talk “Samskriti – Prakriti” (Culture and Nature) which is a new chapter here was printed in our prominent newspapers. It has earned me enthusiastic responses from various sources. Again, my thanks.</p>
		<p>I believe that in the present expanded version the work will fulfil its objective even better.</p>
		<p>Bangalore <br />June 22, 1956.</p>
		<p class="author"><strong>DVG</strong></p>
	</section>
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d.3">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Foreword<br /><em>(For the First edition)</em></h1>
		<p>In this lecture some complex issues like Truth, Dharma and Progress have been discussed. Its length has already exceeded the intended limit. Therefore many aspects of those subjects could not be commented on here. There is an intention to write a different lecture on those topics. The explanation of some of the topics dealt with in this lecture are found in the present writer’s books “Rajya Sastra”.</p>
		<p class="author"><strong>DVG</strong></p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
