<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>saṃskṛti</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-001">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Culture - A preface</h1>
		<p><strong>A Preface</strong></p>
		<p>The word “Culture” has come into use greatly in recent times. It may be said that the main reason for this is because the word “Culture” in English is being used a lot and has gained currency in modern usage.</p>
		<p>The word “Culture” in English in today’s context and meaning is being used since about a hundred years. Its use has attained additional significance especially in the last fifty years, gradually. After the United Nations was born (1945) the use of this word is abundant. In 1946, when the UNESCO was formed, the word “Culture” was incorporated in its very name and gave it an authoritative place. The Indian Government has hoisted the flag of culture.</p>
		<p>Then what is the meaning of this word which has such an influential position?</p>
		<p>Nobody has yet authoritatively defined the meaning of the word. In parlance, there are many loose meanings. A society of scholars has not brought it to a conclusive stage. If you look at the history of such a society, in its discussion of this question, instead of solving the question, it looks as though a fresh generation has got an argument to contend with.</p>
		<p>Some people may feel that the special feature of culture is that it has not come under any restriction. Since it has remained so “shapeless” anybody can use it in any situation to complete a sentence. When at the beginning of a lecture when a word or idea with a definite specific meaning does not suggest itself, the lecturer when he brings forth “Culture”, the audience (or the readers) get the impression that something profound is being said. By the very word “Culture” the ear hears something of importance. Culture, Freedom, Equality, Fraternity, Dharma – etc. are the terminology of creating impressiveness. The meaning of these words can be expanded or contracted at will and an indescribable aura can be brought about. Such clichés are the saving friends of a speech-maker. When there is no other helper, these are of use.</p>
		<p>Nobody will say that the word “Culture” has no meaning. Not only does it have a meaning; but its meaning is very extensive, many faceted and very important for our lives. Though no authoritative statement or a definitive dictionary give an explanation of its meaning, we can understand the meaning of that word through its use by the learned people. The meaning of so many quintessential words which are in our daily use cannot be easily explained in precise terminology. What is “Man”? What is “Truth”? What is “Dharma”? These questions are easily asked but difficult to be answered. We can recognize the animal called Man. We can point it out by our finger. But difficult to explain in so many words. Still there are answers. To get to know them is possible by effort. Let us find out by consideration and discussion.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
