<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>samskrt</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-002">
 		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Etymology</h1>
<p><strong>W</strong>hile discussing the influence of education or while talking about the good nature and conduct of cultivated people, the word “Culture” makes its appearance as an adjunct. This word does not seem to have been in use in ancient works. But its related synonym “Samskara” is in early use. Expressions like “Sixteen Samskaras”, the “Samskara” of intellect etc. are familiar to everyone. The language which has “samskara” is “Samskrita”. Similarly the man who has a sound educational training is a “Samskrita”. This is the past usage.</p>
<p>The wealth of good qualities of a “Samskrita” is “Samskriti”. In this sense, the word “Samskriti” is coming into increased use in Kannada now for the past fifteen to twenty years. This is an essential word. When a new word is coming into use among us, it means that a new idea is entering into our life. A new word for a new idea or feeling. Actually rather than calling it a new feeling, it is better to think of it as a revived idea. Now it is coming into memory; something old which had gone out of sight is coming back with a shine and a new resplendence. This shows the animation of that object. That being the case it is essential to the fulfillment of our life.</p>
<p>That quality or characteristic of man which we are proclaiming as “Samskriti”, in this sense the English word “Culture” has also come into common parlance only recently – since about a hundred and fifty years. The origin of the word culture is “Cult” or “Cultus” in Latin. The original meaning of the word was along the lines of “elevated”, “enlightened”, “show respect”, “serve”, “refinement”, “development”, “improvement”, “dedication” and such – from this gradually arose two meanings– (1) “theism” – acceptance of religious belief, etc. (2) the worship of the earth, interest in land, agriculture, cultivation, etc. From the second meaning came “Agriculture”. Gradually, from this came cultivation of land, growing produce and words like “horticulture” (gardening), arboriculture (growing trees and bushes), etc. Further along came “sericulture” (rearing silk worms), “pissiculture” (fisheries) and words like that. By keeping on expanding, the study of bacteria gave raise to “bacteriological culture” and the meaning – manufacture of artificial pearls, etc. In recent times, especially in America, the word refers to the social organizations of various races, the matrimonial and other forms of practices, the conduct of the family, the customs and manners of eating and etiquette modes of social behaviour and the style of living came to be referred to. About a hundred years ago (1867) “Culture” came to signify a man’s intellectual cultivation, the superiority of the mind and the inner development. Thus “Culture” has come to signify the sophistication and refinement attained through literature, music, painting, sculpture and such other arts. This superior artistic temperament came to be known as “Culture”. Now about eighty years ago (1869), the English scholar – poet, Mathew Arnold, in his lengthy essay “Culture and Anarchy” has discussed the mental attitudes and propensities of three classes of people in the English society of that time which appeared prominent to him. (1) those who are born rich are “barbarians”. (2) the middle-class people who are interested in money – matters and bodily comforts are the “philistines”. (3) The poor people who are busy in day-to- day existence are the “populace”. Arnold’s complaint is that in none of these three is found the taste for culture as all these were not supporters of spiritual values. Let us look at Bhartrihari’s statement.</p>
<p>Culture is not mere education, it is the pollen of the flower of education. It is a totally satisfying conduct and character born out of the wedlock of literary sensibility and discrimination of worldly wisdom; it is the sum total or the end product of the comparative knowledge of various subjects, various aspirations and goods, various philosophical standpoints, and various religious beliefs. That is the gentle and sophisticated softness, good behaviour and respectful attitude of culture.</p>
<p>Culture is not mere scholarship. A man may learn a dozen languages; may have read hundreds of books; he may have at his finger tips grammars and dictionaries. But by only this he cannot be considered a “Cultured” person.</p>
<p>Culture is not mere knowledge or the mastery over scientific information about physical things and substances. A man may have traveled in many countries; he may have transacted business with hundreds of people. He may have put into his store – house of memory information of a thousand things collected from various sources like books on geography, history, government reports and newspapers. But this collection, by itself cannot become “Culture”.</p>
<p>Mere cleverness and shrewdness is not “Culture” either. A man may converse with astonishing wit, he may be an expert in logic and make his opponent accept defeat by using ingenious arguments. Being careful and patient in carrying out works with planning and smoothness, one can win victory. Even this is not culture.</p>
<p>Music and such other taste for art which are learnt is not culture. A man may identify various ragas; one can criticize the strength and weakness of the strokes of a painting; one can discuss the proportions of a sculptural piece; one can be an expert actor. From these things one can not prove that he is cultured.</p>
<p>He may be good speaker, may have mastery of speech, he may cite poetry and proverbs in conversation; he may narrate anecdotes, he may show dexterity in dialogue; None of these constitute the inner core of culture.</p>
<p>Then, what is Culture? From refinement comes culture. Refinement or ‘Samskarana’ – ‘Samyak Karana’ – “Samyak Kriti” comes “Samskriti” or culture, which means doing well, making something beautiful, refining something, cleaning of something and making it good. “Good” means a substance or subject matter is the way it should be. That is “Good” when the ultimate goal of life is brought closer in an object or behaviour, that is pleasing and convenient. That is, propriety. That is, genuineness. The effort to find that “Good” – the search for that beauty, that truth is culture. The means and method by which what is pleasant and meaningful is brought into our lives, this method is culture. In our various contacts and interactions with the world, the propriety that we create is culture.</p>
<p>Isn’t beauty a condition, a state, that everybody desires everywhere? We wash ourselves and bedeck ourselves with ornaments. We get our houses painted. We search for beauty for whatever we see. Similarly don’t we need certain elegance in our worldly relationships? Those behavioural patterns are culture. It is the beauty of feeling, a beauty of conduct. That living creature who doesn’t wear that ornament is a forest animal. Just as we try to make our home and health clean, so must we consciously strive to make our relationship with the world beautiful. This alone is the sum total of culture.</p>
<p>The orderly cleanliness of word and deed is culture. Cleanliness means taking out all dirt. So the work of culture is rubbing off the dirt of the mind and washing it away.</p>
<p>The discrimination between right and wrong, the suitable and the unsuitable in our daily situations is an aspect of culture; Another aspect is judging the value of things and their priorities; yet another aspect is the awareness of other people’s aims and intentions; another aspect is taste in simplicity; yet another is awareness of the stabilizing force of Dharma / right conduct. Another aspect is the soul – searching self realization. Thus culture is the result of the integration resulting in bringing together disparate kinds of knowledge and different kinds of disciplines.</p>
<p>This achievement of the fruition of life is through inner cultivation. The different facets of this cultivation are – study of books, dedication to the arts and the company of Connoisseurs There is no opposition between scholarship and culture. There is no enmity between sharpness of mind and culture. There is place in culture for scholarship, brilliance and sharpness of intellect. But this by itself cannot constitute culture. Culture is the end product of the inner consciousness. This product requires several ingredients. No one of these can call itself culture by itself.</p>
<p>Culture and Progress – both these words have the same intention originally. The superior life – that great concept holds up each side through each word. That which – improves life is culture; that which leads to improvement is progress. In ordinary parlance, the purification of the inner being is culture – the dexterity of morality, ethics, finesse and efficiency. Progress consists of the methodical, proper working for the intended goal and purpose, in bringing about comfort, convenience and wealth. Primarily, culture belongs to the individual, progress to the society.</p>
<p>Both these concepts are contained in Dharma – Dharma is holding together bearing and wearing. That is Dharma which valuable life is wearing. What is it that which is the adhesive integrating force? It is that unchanging, Eternal Entity which has three components – (1) The individual or self (2) The surrounding world which appears (3) Iswara or God or the Lord.</p>
<p>Each entity or substance in creation has a special quality or characteristic of its own – coldness for water, movement for the air, the burning heat for fire, flight for the bird, thoughtfulness for man. Thus each individuality or natural and true remembrance of the lord of the universe, for the sake of attaining a vision of Him through co-operating with the life of the universe through the flowering forth of natural and authentic quality – that is Dharma.</p>
<p>One face of Dharma is the Philosophy that promotes spiritual progress; the other face, the knowledge of science which makes for worldly progress; yet another face is the fine – art of living; - culture.</p>
	</section>
	</body>
</html>
