<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>samskrt</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-">
 		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">The Words of Mathew Arnold</h1>
<p><strong>L</strong>et us listen to the words of Mathew Arnold, an experienced person in this field. The attempt to make every situation in life, relevant, proper and meaningful through our attitude and action is culture. He says –</h2>
<p>‘‘Culture’’ moves inspired not merely by the desire of purely scientifically discriminatory understanding of information of the mind, but it is also inspired by the strong force of social welfare and the desire for right conduct and beliefs.’’ According to Bishop Wilson, the defining sentence reads –</p>
<p>‘Making Wisdom and the will of God strong in the World’.</p>
<p>A delicate aspect should not be forgotten here. It is possible that while in our enthusiasm to do good and examining what is God’s will, we may lose our caution and be misled. When our desire for the good is keen, our mind will be action bound. Then we will not have enough patience to give enough attention to the critical examination of the subject. Therefore whatever our mind sees as relevant, we carry out in action these half-baked immature ideas. But this is not a characteristic of Culture. In culture, in addition to the desire to do good, the desire for knowledge is also intermixed. What is wisdom? What is the will of God? Culture requires a sound understanding in these matters. It cannot tolerate un-researched ideas. Culture accepts the fact that any action, any arrangement cannot last and cannot be beneficial unless it has the foundation of discriminatory knowledge as well as the will of God. That is why, even in the most sacred ideal of correcting the mistakes and shortcomings of the world and problems solved, culture cannot act in haste. True culture recognizes that without knowing correctly what the right action is and what is salutary the work undertaken may result in disaster.</p>
<p>“Culture is a by-product of social life. A man who lives alone by himself cannot obtain its comprehensive and complete essence. It is a rule that an individual who is treading the path of this perfection has to take others along. If he breaks this rule, his progress will be impeded and his development itself is truncated and he becomes weak. He must constantly augment the group of his fellow travellers.</p>
<p>“The flowering forth of all the forces which value the beauty of human nature, their simultaneous commingling is culture. No one single force among them should dominate to the detriment of the others. Looked at this way, culture is broader than the injunctions of religion.’’</p>
<p>“We have, haven’t we, used the words complete propriety and complete conglomeration of good qualities above? Completeness means attainment of a certain ideal; it is not achieving something; it is not getting something. It is an inner state, an inner mental attitude. It is not external circumstances; it doesn’t conquer others; it is not the feeling of profit by defeating others.’’</p>
<p>“Culture is the alloy of good qualities. In this alloy of fullness, two excellent characteristics are combined – Sweetness and Light. Culture is equal to poetry. It has to follow the right path that poetry follows. The concept of a beautiful life and the attainment of the almond salubrious which brings it about – this is the main quality of poetry; so it is of culture”.</p>
<p>This is the view of Matthew Arnold We can accept this as a definition.</p>
<p>‘We have said that the word culture is new to Kannada. But the object suggested by this word is now new to us. It is as old as the Vedas, the Ramayana and the Mahabharata. The Mantras and the teachings used in the “Samskaras” (religious rituals) like the “Upanayana” (the initiation ceremony) show the quintessential nature of culture.</p>
<p><strong>The Oath Taken at Upanayana</strong></p>
<p>(I will act according to the rule of what should be remembered and what should be forgotten, what is to be eschewed and what is not, what is to be believed and what not to be believed, what is to be learned and what not – in all these dualities, in the matters of what is beneficial to human beings and with regard to prescribed duties; in all things pertaining to the highest state of the soul, in all these things, I will act following the relevant injunctions in each and everyone of the cases).</p>
<p><strong>The Religious Duty of a Bachelor</strong></p>
<p>(Unceasingly trying to keep all this activities under control) (Praising oneself denigrading others is to be eschewed)</p>
<p>- Apastamba</p>
<p>(He must be a teller of truth, one without shame and pride)</p>
<p>- Bodhayana.</p>
<p>The hero of Srimad Ramayana and Yudhishtira of Mahabharata are the ideal human beings exemplifying the acme of culture. When the English people, when they admire the speech and conduct of an individual, they call him a “gentleman”. In that one word are embedded the feelings of Honourable, Generous, Noble and Courteous. Similarly our words of praise are “Susamskrita, Sushikshita, Sabhya, Sajjana, Sadgrihasta, Maanishtha, Manyadevanta, Sambhavita, Doddamanushya”, etc. These indicate the nature of culture. Rama and Dharmaraja are gentlemen by birth.</p>
<p><strong>Who is a “Gentleman?”</strong></p>
<p>Cardinal Newman’s (an English man of Religion) description is famous.</p>
<p>“He is merely occupied in merely removing the obstacles which hinder the free and unembarrassed action of those about him. His great concern is to make everyone at ease and at home. He has his eyes on all his company, he is tender towards the bashful, gentle towards the distant and merciful towards the absurd. He is seldom prominent in conversations, and never wearisome. He makes light of favours which he does them, and seems to be receiving when he is conferring. He never speaks of himself except when compelled, never defends himself by a mere retort, he has no ears for slander or gossip, is scrupulous in imprinting motives to those who interfere with him and interprets everything for the best. From a long-sighted prudence, he observes the maxim of the ancient sage, that we should ever conduct ourselves towards our enemy as if he were one day to be our friend. He may be right or wrong in his opinion, but he is too clear-headed to be unjust; he is as simple as he is forcible and as brief as he is decisive”.</p>
<p><strong>The Example of Valmiki</strong></p>
<p>In the Ramayana, here and there the nature of the speech and expression of a cultured man is described. Among those incidents, the address of Hanuman on his first meeting Rama and Lakshmana is one. At Kishkindha, near the Rishyamuka mountain as soon as Hanuman sees Rama and Lakshmana, he takes the shape of an ascetic, introduces himself “I am the minister of Sugriva, praises their effulgent looks and bravery and asks “Who are the two of you? You look like Gods. What is the purpose of your visit here?” and so on. Rama praises the beauty of Hanuman’s speech in these words.</p>
<p>(This person has learnt his grammar well. Though he has spoken so much, there is not a single inappropriate word. The speech is not lengthy, still it doesn’t give room for any ambiguity. It is not slow, neither is it fast. The voice is not very loud, neither is it too soft and inaudible. It is of medium pace and pitch There is a pre-determined logical sequence in the presentation of the concerned matter. This auspicious speech which is neither too hasty or too tardy has an appeal to the heart and captures it).</p>
<p>If these words of Valmiki are compared with the above complementary sentences of Newman, the characteristics of the speech, emotion and expression of a cultured person shine forth in our mind.</p>
<p class="text-center"><strong>The Summary Statement of Bhartrihari</strong></p>
<p>The following stanza of the poet Bhartrihari tells about the essential characteristics of a cultured person briefly.</p>
<p><strong>Observe this also</strong></p>
<p>Culture is a sort of self-education. It is not just the workings of the mind or of the discriminatory faculty; Neither is it mere memory power. It belongs to that entity of individual self which is the master of the mind, the discriminatory faculty and memory. The wind combines into itself as one unified rich and strange unnamable synthetic perfume of variety of smells from variegated hundreds of forest flowers like champaka, kedage, jasmine, padari, suragi, honne, etc. The doctor dissolves into a single concoction the essence of several medicinal herbs and prepares a new panacea of liquid portion. Similarly, culture is the salubrious commingling of various emotions and feelings – a discipline – of a variety of music and other fine arts, disciplines and branches of learning. There is sense in it, wisdom in it, generosity in it, courage in it, hardness and laxity. Let us remember this sentence of Bhavabhuti –</p>
<p>(How can one fathom the heart of an exceptional person? It can be harder than a diamond. It can also be softer than a flower).</p>
<p>Valmiki has given an example for this:</p>
<p>Sri Rama is Vishnu in his valour; still he looks like the moon. When he is angry he is like the fire of deluge; but in forgiveness he is like Mother Earth).</p>
<p>What does this mean? The qualities that are required to make life meaningful are many, and not of one kind only. For a casual look they may look like mutually contradictory. But there is a method of integration and reconciling them; In that integrated state they become complementary.</p>
<p>Anger and Forgiveness are by nature opposite of each other like Fire and Water. But in great men they stay side by side. When he feels that anger is just, forgiveness recedes silently. When forgiveness is just, anger bows out. These various qualities get fulfilled only by the following of propriety. A good quality when it breaks its bounds, no matter how valuable by itself, at the time of the carrying out of action brings about only misfortune. This sort of propriety born out of discrimination and the manifestation of good which follows a sense of propriety is the characteristic of culture.</p>
<p>We said that culture means the achievement of propriety in the activity of living. We said that it is an agreeable amalgam of various qualities; we said that it is the discriminatory knowledge of various grades relationships and their complementary commingling. Which is the directing principle for that propriety? What is the ideal for this homogeneous state? In taking into account the differences, what is it that determines true value?</p>
	</section>
	</body>
</html>
