<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>saṃskṛti</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-004">
			<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">The Value System of the Stuff of Life</h1>
			<p><strong>I</strong>n the world when we want to determine the value of any object, we accept an universally recognized entity as its measure. When we measure time the winking of eyes (which is known as “nimisha” meaning minute) becomes the first measure. The stride of a foot for a foot or the mark on the finger for an inch become its measure. In weighing gold the red grain (gulaganji) becomes the measure. In measuring rice a handful becomes the measure. In counting money a paisa or some other small coin becomes the standard. Then what is the measure to determine the genuineness of culture? To determine the various ingredients to be mixed in proper proportions which is the balance that can take on the</p>
			<p>correct weights? Which is the measuring rod to apply to proper and improper things?</p>
			<p>Propriety is the highest point of good nature or state. We use freely words like good, soothing, auspicious and bringer of fortune and fame. But how to determine which is beneficial? What is its characteristic? What is its means of its attainment and its proof?</p>
			<p>Our ancestors have delved deep into this question and have searched its source. Their conclusion is that what is permanent and everlasting is the good and beneficial.</p>
			<p>In Sanskrit language ‘Sat’ means (1) that which is, and (2) that which is GOOD. In Kannada ‘OL’ (UL) means the same –(1) that which has formulated itself and (2) that which brings about good. That which can live or exist without destruction, that is the truly good.</p>
			<p>From ‘Sat’ comes “Truth” (Satya). From ‘Sat’ comes Essence (Sattva).</p>
			<p>Of all truths, the ultimate truth is the Self. That is the Supreme Soul (“Paramatma”) or “Parabrahman”. That is what is called God or “Bhagavan”. That is the entity which is Eternal, which remains the same at all times and in all states, which is unsublatable, unchanging, the same, ever-lasting, and always existing. That is why, in all our worldly activities and worldly glories what is close to the Eternal Entity and to what extent, to that extent, that particular thing is capable of doing good to us. What things take us away from the memory of the Supreme, they become un-enjoyable to us. Thus the vision of the Supreme is that which determines our means of measuring.</p>
			<p>Of all the things that a man knows, his own inner being is the complete truth as far as he is concerned. Of all things, that which he knows first and foremost without any doubt is his own inner soul known to him as “I”, “I”, and the support for all this knowledge is this same consciousness, his soul. Life exists on account of it. The soul itself is Life. From this Soul is the world. Thus the individual soul is the source for the existence of man. That is the beginning of his life; that is the means of all his activity. That is the only one which remains constant and unchanging at all times and in all states of his experience. That is why that Self is permanent as far as he is concerned. That is the “Sadvastu” or the Real and True Entity. That is why the Vedas say –</p>
			<p>Through such sacred utterances, it is said that the self-stuff (Atma Vastu) is the biggest of all. Following this, Apastamba Maharshi, the Smriti maker has said – And has reached the conclusion that there is no greater gain than self-knowledge.</p>
			<p>Thus, the Self, Self-Realization, the opportunity for this Realization of the Self – this is the ultimate Good which is the epistemological measure determining the hierarchy of values regarding all things in the world, all glorious things, all our desires and our experiences of all objects and substances – this is the means, the determining Dharma or Right conduct that is the seed of culture.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
	</html>
