<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>saṃskṛti</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-005">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">The Arrangement of the Goal of Life</h1>
		<p><strong>W</strong>hat has resulted following this principle is the arrangement of the four – fold values of life or “Purusharthas”. “Purushartha” means man’s desire or goal. That which he considers valuable or desirable is “Artha”. In English it is called “Value”. Whatever the endeavour or employment of man, it comes under the preview of one of the four object, types of uses, namely Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha. (1) The works that are undertaken to achieve progress in this world or to attain a good life hereafter and the means thereof is “Dharma”. All the family and social duties are “Dharma”. (2) The acquisition of the means of obtaining it, be it money or produce etc. is “Artha”. (3) The various kinds of longings and desires are “Karma”. (4) Transcending all desired and being pure, wanting liberation and realizing the ultimate with no other thought is “Moksha”. These four endeavours in life – when they are in the control of the memory of the inner Being – nothing is eschewed; all things become acceptable. But they must be in a state of equilibrium. In the Mahabharata it is said:</p>
		<p>He who sees to it that there is no mutual conflict between Dharma and Artha, between Dharma and Kama, between Kama and Artha and enjoys all these aspects, Dharma, Artha and Kama attains the greatest happiness.</p>
		<p>(Every day, first Dharma, second Artha (money) and finally bhoga are to be achieved. This is the injunction of the Sastra)<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-005-01">*</a></sup>.</p>
		<p>Here the description of Moksha is not clear. It is implied. Here Moksha is an occurrence beyond the world. Moksha is an accomplished fact for him who has achieved the three worldly ideals. When all the mud, dust and debris covering the treasure that has been buried in a hole in the ground is cleared the precious jewels shine forth on their own. There is no special effort required to make them shine. Thus through the three – fold ideal with its contact with the world is washed clean away in life. Then the self - effulgent inner Being reveals itself by itself.</p>
		<p>The Self is that which remains like an emperor imbedded in all objects that appear to man both directly and indirectly. The highest achievement and culmination for man is the full revelation of that, this journey of life in order to get that vision is what makes his life purposeful. The two sides or borders of the road that he takes are “Pravritti Dharma” and “Nivritti Dharma”. Pravritti Dharma consists of training in areas like the family, religion, employment and in centres of the country and geographical area of his living. Nivritti Dharma consists of external and internal cleanliness, charity, control of senses, worship, meditation, sacrifice, disinterestedness, etc.</p>
		<p>Many manifestations of the Nivritti Dharma may not be understood by people who skim only the surface. They say “What is the use of fasting?” They ask “Why shout Bhajans? Is God deaf ?” They have not known the turmoils of life. They do not know how to bring courage and strength to life. The secrets of spiritual cultivation, as far as several people of today are concerned – many educated among them – have become like a secret that is whispered for a deaf man. What is uttered is one thing – what is heard is quite another. Just as the senses of vision, senses of hearing, the senses of smell are different, similarly the inner sense organ which can cognize the metaphysical is different. That is the inner vision. That is the inner instruction. For those for whom it is not tuned and trained, the philosophical truths are like a musical instrument played in front of a deaf man or a dance performed in front of a blind man.</p>
		<p>Those who believe that there is the Self – there is an individual self and there is an ultimate Self, they weigh everything in the scale of the good of the Supreme Self and determine value. An object is valued according to the proportion of “Sat” (Truth content) in it. Thus the main measure in the calculation of culture is the remembrance of the ultimate Essence – the absolute Self, God, the Lord of the universe.</p>
		<p>That human culture which is of this kind deserves the name “Daivi Sampath”. The Bhagavadgita describes its characteristics this way:</p>
		<p>“Sattvasamshuddhi” means being without taint in one’s mature, “Shaucha” means purity, “Shuchi” means transparently clean. The Shine which results from cleanliness is given great importance by the Veda; thus:</p>
		<p>We must keep not only our bodies clean but our minds also. As Purandhara Dasa has said “You must clean your minds”.</p>
		<p>Because for the unwashed mind, the nuances of the atmospheric differences do not immediately become clear. Just as for a clean hand, the fine and rough things become clear on touch, for the purified mind the surrounding fineness and sophistication becomes clear at one. It is this sensitiveness that we should attain and maintain morally. Just as the string of a Veena vibrates for the wind, pure heart vibrates in response to the surrounding atmosphere. The level and extent of that sensitiveness determines the extent and sensitiveness of the individual moral fibre. Just as the singer the flute, the runner the feet, the goldsmith the finger and the painter his eye, the cultured man protects his conscience from being polluted by the atmosphere. He in whose inner conscience the do’s and don’ts flash forth instantly, his outer behaviour gets beautified automatically.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
