<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>saṃskṛti</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-006">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Hindu Culture</h1>
		<p><strong>T</strong>he two quintessential aspects of Hindu Culture may be said to be supreme importance given to inner life and the philosophical attitude in the carrying on of the worldly affairs. We fix the value for all objects and relationships from the point of view of inner vision. After cogitating thus, arranging and organizing our priorities without doing damage to the higher goal from the lesser, by reconciling and unifying the four-fold ideal – living this way is Dharma. That is the inner core of the Veda and Vedanta system. The self-stuff is indestructible – eternal. It has to enjoy and suffer as results of its own previous actions. This individual selfhood and its history of past actions is beginningless. Similarly is this world beginningless. The ups and down of the individual self are according to the meritorious and mean actions. It earns its existence in other worlds. The individual self gets its relationship with the world according to its own earlier credits and debits. Though such is the binding in the individual body’s breath, new air is mixing with the old air every minute, to the extent of man trying to free himself from old bondage, new breath, new independent respiration will always be arising. He can attain the grace of God through devotion, helping others, meditation and performance of tapas. The individual self by curtailing desire and avarice by practicing disinterestedness and egolessness, attaining self-control and the discriminating knowledge of the difference between the Self and the non-self, through the practice of the Right conduct, that jiva or individual self can rise above the shackles of the cage. Then it gets the knowledge of the Pure Self – the vision of the complete Self. Then gradually the direct vision of God – the plenary experience of Brahman. That is “Moksha” or Liberation from worldly bondage. That is Hindu culture which is based on this trend of thought being followed for thousands of years by our people.</p>
		<p>Though the word culture is new to us, its meaning is not new. That beauty of social behaviour which has been known to us since old times by the words mildness, gentlemanliness, kindness, smoothness, submissiveness, respect, generosity, etc. – these are the stuff of culture. Saltness, sourness, pungency and jaggery, where they are by themselves separately, they look mutually contradictory. When they are mixed in a certain proportion in saaru (Rasam) in an agreeable manner, that potion assures distinctively different taste different from each ingredient and extremely taste palatable. Sandalwood, civet (the sweet aroma emanating from a certain type of eat), a type of camphor, saffron, though they are not opposed to each other smell differently. But when they are mixed in a certain proportion, a special aroma seemingly a fifth one arises. Similarly education, politeness, cleverness, courage, compassion, humour, bravery, adventure, dignity, these qualities when they are combined, as a result, a tenth, a beauty of conduct makes its appearance. Where that is present, there will be no room for fear and no opportunity for selfishness. It engenders mutual trust and confidence among people. But it doesn’t obliterate respect. All in all, it creates an atmosphere of friendship and peace. Such is the benefit of culture. Then as a result of maturity, the self is a latent glow emanating always. It is a symphony of feeling.</p>
		<p>Let us take an example. All our Sruthis and Smritis say that truth is the ultimate Dharma don’t they? Truth means actuality. Speaking and acting according to what has appeared to us exactly as it has is truth. If this is said the essence of truth seems very simple. It is neither so simple nor easy.</p>
		<p>The great Manu has decreed truthful behaviour thus – “Truth must be told: that which is pleasant must be told.</p>
		<p>Truth which is unpleasant must not be told. That which is pleasant but untruthful must not be told either”.</p>
		<p>Let us compare this advice with another and discuss it.</p>
		<p>“It is said that what is retained unsaid is superior to what is actually said. When it is necessary to speak out, only truth must be said”.</p>
		<p>Silence is better than speech. This is the first principle. If something has to be spoken only truth must be said. This is the second principle. That a pleasant thing must be spoken is the third. That what is spoken must be according to and in keeping with Dharma is the fourth aphorism.</p>
		<p>What does it all amount to? (1) As far as possible, silence should be maintained; speech must be minimized. When Dharma doesn’t demand talk, speech must be avoided. (2) When speech becomes necessary it must be spoken according to the approval by truth, it must give up a harsh demeanor and wear the gasp of pleasant exterior and must act to subserve the interest of Dharma and bring benefit to all parties.</p>
		<p>There is a method in truth speaking. In many human situations, truth may seem to trust. There is the famous proverb “One who speaks the harsh truth antagonizes the world”. Still, it is the uniqueness of culture to get rid of the harshness and reveal the truth in its mild form. The method and manner of speaking the truth has to be determined by a sense of discrimination and the understanding of the context. Thus speaking the truth is not a mechanical act, it is a well thought about act.</p>
		<p>That is the opinion of Sage Manu.</p>
		<p>What is true and what is pleasant are not the same thing. Often, not only are they different, but are mutually opposed to each other. In such circumstances removing the unpleasantness while speaking the truth and removing the untruth while speaking what is pleasant is approved by Dharma. After saying this, in providing a bodily sheath to truth in words, a critical appraisal strategy become necessary.</p>
		<p>Pure truth is like ginger. The doctor doesn’t make a patient eat it just as it is. He “cures” it – i.e. he mixes it with other edible things thus refining it, reduces its pungency and gives it to the patient.</p>
		<p>Such a thing is the work of culture.</p>	
	</section>
</body>
</html>
