<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>samskrt</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-007">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">The Finesse in the Depiction of Truth</h1>
		<p><strong>Bharata’s Experience</strong></p>
		<p>An example of this is provided by the poet Bhasa in his play “Pratima Nataka”. The situation there pertains to the episode of Bharata being informed of his father’s death. After Sri Rama leaves for the forest, when his father Dasaratha passes away, Bharata was at Rajagriha, his maternal uncle’s capital. The Guru, Sage Vasistha sends a messenger to bring him. As soon as he sees the messenger Bharata enquires after the health of his father. The messenger without telling him that Dasaratha is dead, only informs him that he sank to the ground overcome by a heart attack. They start from there and come to Ayodhya. Even then the messenger did not give out the whole truth. His mind hesitates to speak out directly the harsh truth. He thinks:</p>
		<p>Precisely at that time a messenger comes and delivers the message sent by the Preceptor that it was still the duration of the star Krittika and that after a little while when the star Rohini would be reigning, Bharata could then enter the city. Accordingly, with the intention of relaxing in the garden for some time, while searching for a suitable place to do so, he beholds a temple. Bharata enters the temple and sees the row of statues adorned by sandle paste and flowers. When he is thinking of prostrating to them, the Priest enters and says that it is not proper for him to do so.</p>
		<p>Bharata : “These must be Kshatriyas. What are their names?” Priest : “They are Ikshvakus”.</p>
		<p>Bharata : “Ikshvakus? Then they are the kings of Ayodhya. By my good fortune I have now the opportunity to meet them. Who is this other one?”</p>
		<p>Priest : “He is Dilipa, one who lighted up the world with his Righteousness.”</p>
		<p>Bharata : “My salutations to him, who was immersed in Dharma. Who is this?”</p>
		<p>Priest : “Raghu Maharaja – a beneficiary of the blessings of thousands of Brahmins.”</p>
		<p>Bharata : “How powerful is Death. It transgressed even the blessings of Brahmin. My pranams to Raghu.</p>
		<p>Who is this other?”</p>
		<p>Priest : “Kind Aja who was without blemish through the performance of many sacrifices. When his beloved died, he gave up his kingship.”</p>
		<p>Bharata : “My obeisances to him who had the praiseworthy contrition.</p>
		<p>When Bharata was saying this, his gaze travels to the fourth statue – that of Dasaratha. Then, since he hadn’t heard the names of the earlier three with care, he asks the priest to repeat their names. He repeats once again. “This is Dilipa, this is Raghu, this is Aja”. Bharata salutes them separately, severally and asks for the names again. The priest does so. When for the last time the name of Aja is mentioned Bharata tries to remember his relationship with his father by asking “Is he not the father of Maharaja Dasaratha?” He asks the priest “Are the statues of living people kept here?” The priest answers “No, only the statues of the dead are kept here”. And explains –</p>
		<p>Bharata swoons on hearing this. Then he recovers. The story proceeds.</p>
		<p>When Bharata remembers the stories about his ancestors through their statues, the latent devotion towards them hiding in the depths of his memory becomes patent. He pays his homage to each one of them standing in front of the likeness of each ancestor in a chronological order. Thus step by step, by the time he comes to Dasaratha, his mind would have reached a certain philosophical disinterestedness. By contemplating on great people his soul would have reached having beholden a hair-raising ennobling sight. The transient, small-minded emotions would have evaporated and only a long-lasting picture of greatness would be visible before him. Another memory of nobility would have mingled with it. For Raghu who was pure by his very birth, for Dilipa who was universally admired, for legendary Aja, for none of these did Death make a concession. The glory of this world does end one day, no matter how great the man. The paths of glory lead but to the grave. Bharata’s mind would be filled with this philosophy of time. Thus the news of Dasaratha’s death reaches his mind when it has been reminded of the memory of his ancestors, the powerful influence of time and the gravity of the human condition. It was the “culture” of sage Vasistha that he had arranged the timing of the entrance to the city preparing it for receiving the sad news. Not that Bharata’s sorrow was alloyed by this preparation: but its impact must have been softened by this. Supposing without either through the device of the statues or by some other means, Bharata had been bluntly told “Bharata, your father is dead”. What might be the damage for his mind! If we can guess by our common knowledge the mental state of Bharata by a sudden rough announcement of the devastating news without Guru Vasistha’s timely plan, we can surely say that the device considerably arranged the bluntness of the blow.</p>
		<p>Culture is the mode and the method which takes away the string and cruelty from a tragic situation, the pangs of the news of death and the sharpness of the words and ways of rough human behaviour. That which takes away the roughness from a rough situation, the pungency from a pungent circumstance that is culture.</p>
		<p>Sage Vasistha did not suppress the truth as it was unpleasant. But he did not allow the unpleasantness in its cruel aspect. This is the import of the above statement quoted from Manu.</p>
		<p><strong>The Example of Macbeth</strong></p>
		<p>Let us look at another example. This is from Shakespeare. In the play Macbeth, Lady Macbeth would have lost her mind. Macbeth summons the doctor and asks him to treat her. She is the king’s dear one – a partner in his actions. So it is that her state of mind grieves him. We must observe in what words he informs the doctor this news which has plunged his own mind in a frightening state. Does he say that his wife has gone mad? No. “Madness”. “Distemper”, “Mind’s disease” are harsh words. For the speaker of these words, his own mind suffers while speaking. Macbeth who was loving to speak such words about his beloved is not approved by his mind. So he expresses his mental stress in smooth and soft words.</p>
		<p class="myquote">Can’st then not minister to a mind diseas’d;<br /> Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow;<br /> Raze out the written troubles of brain;<br /> And with same sweet oblivious antidote,<br />Cleanse the stuff ’d bosom of that perilous stuff,<br /> Which weighs upon the heart?</p>
		<p class="quote-author"><em>Macbeth V, iv, 40-45.</em></p>
		<p>Tr uth has not been hidden here. Only its simple unpleasantness has been somewhat veiled.</p>
		<p>The manner of speech that has been followed by Macbeth here is called ‘Tact’ in English. We can say it is “dexterity in speech”. The special characteristic of this kind of communication skill consists of using a method of not displeasing others, but without sacrificing the interests of truth or acting with previously planned self-control. Untruth and injustice need not be present in the smooth concourse. But if crudity and roughness are contained in the truth, “tact” removes only the lack of sophistication. John Morley has said that tact is something that is the ultimate benefit that is bestowed on us by the study of literature. The fruit of the contemplation of good literature and philosophy is that it gives this smooth behaviour; and the resultant controlled use of words, the ability to bifurcate roughness from speech and smoothen it.</p>
		<p>Another example. In Hamlet, another famous play of Shakespeare when the Queen wants to have a private conversation with the King, what does she say in order to send away the retinue?</p>
		<p class="myquote">Bestow this place on us a little while.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-007-01">*</a></sup></p>
		<p class="quote-author"><em>Hamlet, IV, i, 4</em></p>
		<p>Sri Bhudeva Mukhyapadhaya had strated a fund which he named</p>
		<p>‘Vishwanatha Fund’ in the memory of Viswanatha Tarkabhushana. He had donated for this fund his entire property of One lakh and six thousand rupees. Out of this fund an annual remuneration of fifty rupees would be paid unasked at their own home by money order to learned and pious Brahmins of India.</p>
		<p>The same people who publish the “Education Gazette” had prepared this first year’s report. It contained a sentence which said “The names of those scholars who have been given this year’s “Viswanatha” Award. Sri Bhudeva, when he read this sentence expressed displeasure and instructed that the sentence should be re- framed thus. “The names of scholars who have kindly agreed to accept the “Viswanatha Award” – “Jeevottama Magazine, Kumta, dated 25.02.1966”.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
