<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>samskrt</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-008">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Truth and Dharma</h1>
		<p><strong>W</strong>hen we say that milk is the best food, what we have in our mind as the intention is the suitability of milk as food. Similarly what makes truth invaluable is its Dharmic possibility; for Dharma truth is essential. Therefore, truth is a duty for us. Then is there truth which is not essential to Dharma?. Yes, there is. For the people who have a vast experience in different fields, for those who have observed with a keen and critical eye, truth is not only irrelevant but can sometimes be inimical. The truth at the level of word may be counter productive in action. There is an illustration in Mahabharata. Let us look at it.</p>
		<p><strong>The Mistake of Arjuna</strong></p>
		<p>The battle is taking place at Kurukshetra. Arjuna will have come to the battle field after swearing to Dharmaraya that he would finish off Karna. Believing it, Dharmaraya, out of curiosity would be leading the array in another part of the field. A fierce war takes place that day. In one area, the flood of arrows raining fiercely will be attacking Yudhishtira released by Karna, inspired by Shalya. He recedes to his camp unable to bear the pain of wounds. In another part of the field pressuring the enemy, Arjuna, not finding Yudhishtira anywhere, on hearing the news and perturbed, comes to the camp to see his elder brother. Yudhishtira’s mind is full of anxiety and expectation to hear the news of Karna’s death. In that charged situation “he will be under the impression that Arjuna has brought the desired news. But Arjuna tells him how he was belabored by Aswatthama and while escaping came to hear the tragic news about his brother and he has come to make enquiries. Yudhishtira mistakes this as an un- providing and gets augmented in his anger which was already burning in him. In that fury and excitement he condemns him in all sorts of ways and curses him. “Throw away your Gandiva (Arjuna’s powerful bow). Let there be contempt for your called valour. May your flag and your chariot be ruined.” Arjuna’s reply is equally full of lightning and thunder. Between the two sits Krishna as a silent witness. Then Arjuna hissing like a black cobra turns to Krishna and says “Govinda, you know my oath. I will cut off the head of anyone who asks me to throw away my Gandiva”. Saying so, he pulls his sword from his sheath. Then all his attention is concentrated on the truth of oath he had taken. Parthasarathy (Krishna) who was silent till then, speaks about the secret of Dharma. He addresses Arjuna – “My dear man, what do you know about the true nature of truth? Have your served old men? Have you understood the nuances of Dharma? Have you known about the circumstances when truth can become falsehood and falsehood can become truth?”</p>
		<p>(It is right that truth has to be spoken. Falsehood may have to be spoken too. There are circumstances when falsehood can bring good like truth and truth can bring misfortune like lies).</p>
		<p>In a certain circumstance what is to be spoken, whether truth or falsehood is answered only by the discriminatory process of Dharma. What makes for Dharma has to be spoken. Dharma means that which brings about the good of the world. Krishna says:</p>
		<p>(That speech or conduct which results in bringing about good to the world is Dharma. That means that truth, whether it is to be spoken or not spoken has to be determined by taking into account the resultant fruit).</p>
		<p>(That is truth which is the means of engendering the maximum good to all living beings).</p>
		<p>(Truthful speech is certainly beneficial. But it is difficult to know what exactly it is).</p>
		<p>In order to bring about harmony in marriage which is the main support of society, in order to protect the self-respect of men and women, in order to prevent the slaughter of animals, to stop the erosion and ebbing away of the stuff of life, and in order to protect the rule of righteousness in an all-indusive manner – in these five noble causes, the falsehood that is uttered is not a sin.</p>
		<p>Which devoted wife does not exaggerate the good qualities of her husband while talking to others about him and does not hide his defects? Is this not more praiseworthy than weighing the good and bad in the balance of truth? A cultured man cannot say that her “lies” are sinful. He admires it smilingly.</p>
		<p><strong>The Story of Kaushika</strong></p>
		<p>A word may be truthful in a certain external sense. The action in its result may be the cause of adharma or wrong doing. Sri Krishna himself tells Arjuna a story.</p>
		<p>“In a forest, it seems there was a sage by name Kaushika performing penance. He was a teller of truth. On a certain day, some travellers went running. After a little while some thieves came to him and asked “Did some people go this way? Speak the truth”. Since Kaushika was a teller of truth, he replied “Yes. Some people went that way in the director of the yonder bushes and the grove”. Those robbers were satisfied by his words. They went in the direction pointed out by Kaushika, caught hold of the innocent pilgrims and carried out their wishes. What was the result of the truth spoken by Kaushika? Arjuna, the truth of the oath taken by you about Gandiva is of the same sort!”</p>
		<p>What Krishna said was a subtle nuance of Dharma. What makes this subtlety clear is the way of discrimination. The behaviour resulting from it is character. A man who has made such a behaviour, his very character and inner nature is a cultured man.</p>
		<p>It is said that in a bunch of hundred bananas, at the tip of one of them there will be a drop of nectar. In a huge heap of corn flour, a grain of life-supporting element, the size of a mustard seed will be hiding. Similarly in a cart-load of do’s and don’ts, the subtlety of right conduct of the size of a speck will be present somewhere, enveloping the whole thing. This atom of righteousness is the very life of the ultimate well-being. The very essence of Dharmartha that makes the existence of dharma dwells in this ray of this atom. That is dharma which is contained in the character and conduct permeating that beneficial ray. The external behaviour is only the body of Dharma, the body is essential; but mere external body is not enough. There must be the inner Essence. The knowledge of that inner “elon vital” is the loadstone or magnet that is gained by culture.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
