<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>saṃskṛti</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-009">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">The Synthesis of Various Virtues</h1>
		<p><strong>W</strong>hen in the case of the practice of truth which is the very essence of Dharma, so many qualifications and restrictions are required, many words are not necessary to express how careful we must be in the case of other good qualities. Whatever the virtue which we consider supreme, if it is not subject to a certain delicate rules and regulations, it cannot bring about the best results. Moderation is the method of the fulfillment of good. It is only one half of moral science that those opposed to good qualities are bad qualities; the remaining half consists of the possibilities of human situations where good qualities are opposed to other good qualities. For example, let us look at the two lists of good.</p>
		<table>
			<tr>
				<td>(1)</td>
				<td>(2)</td>	
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Nobility</td>
				<td>Simplicity</td>	
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Maturity</td>
				<td>Humility</td>	
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Courage</td>
				<td>Circumspection</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Confidence in one’s belief</td>
				<td>Curiosity about the opposition</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>A brave resolve</td>
				<td>Preparation for friendliness</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Living alone</td>
				<td>Synthesis of everyone’s welfare</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Independence</td>
				<td>Respect for others </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Commitment to one’s own</td>
				<td>Forgiveness of other’s defeats </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>conviction</td>
			</tr>
		</table>	
		<p>In the above list the qualities of both categories seem complementary But for a critical eye the two aspects of horizontal words in each line seem to be contradictory. It is not usual to find great condition and simple behaviour of an ordinary man in the same man. Similarly it is not common to see dedication to one’s one creed and the tolerance of another belief in the same individual. One does not ordinarily find an independent mind and heeding the other’s point of view together Thus a commendable quality existing separately by itself, if it has to integrate with an equally good quality which is different, assumes a defiant attitude. The quality of devotion and right conduct towards the mother is the same as that concerned with wife. But when the mother and wife are at loggerheads the unified devotion to mother and the love of the wife which should be unison go in separate ways and break away. In such circumstances acting according to propriety and integrating them, this tact is that of culture.</p>
		<p>It is possible that everyone agrees that love of one’s own country and one’s own people are commendable qualities. Thinking of the welfare of entire world and love all humanity are good qualities, in the same way. But what is near is making a lot of noise, remembering what is dear and just in a distant thing is possible only for a cultured mind.</p>
		<p>For human life to become fully happy, the development of one or two qualities is not enough. Hundreds of good qualities must mingle together in mutual friendliness.</p>
		<p>Similarly, the interests and goals of our lives are in hundreds. Our aims should be projecting themselves in myriad directions. Our loves will be tied up in different places. We won’t be able to discard any one of them. That is the reason why we cannot allow disproportionate growth to any one of them. One of them becomes the cause for limiting another. The responsibility of culture is creating the synthesis of disparate through the discriminatory sense of its limits – the synthesis of commingling in various loves.</p>
		<p>Culture makes all areas of life into one unit and looks at the whole thing as impartite. The cultured man makes his own good a part of the good of the town – that of the town as a portion of the country, the history of the country as a portion of the human world, the earth as a segment of the Universe. He will have practiced to think that way. He compares and relates the air he breathes to the clouds in the sky. He thinks of the sparkle in the eyes of the child playing in front of him as akin to the stars. This kind of expansive feeling is the boon we can obtain from culture.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
