<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>samskrt</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-010">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">The Sources of Culture</h1>
		<p><strong>T</strong>he sources of culture are not, one, two, ten, a hundred. These can be divided into six units.</p>
		<ol>
			<li><strong>The Divine Religious injunctions:</strong> The imbedded aspects in this are – the extra sensory metaphysical speculations of Shruti (scriptures), Smrithi (sacred recollected utterances and Puranas – the Myths and Legends), the different types of conclusions drawn from them, the modes of worship, meditation and practices, the methods of ritual do’s and dont’s leading to the search of soul and codes of conduct and behaviour.</li>	
			<li><strong>Literature and other Fine Arts:</strong> In this are included the imaginary worlds which are emotion oriented found in poetry and drama and aesthetic happenings like music, sculpture, dance and allied subjects.</li>
			<li><strong>Science:</strong> In this are placed Physics, Biology and Philosophical enquiry into the origin of creation and education of man regarding Politics and Economics.</li>
			<li><strong>The National and the International History and the account of great men.</strong></li>
			<li><strong>The influence of one’s own Society:</strong> The atmosphere of individual’s religion, caste and group, the nature of his own region; the background of his profession and that of his friends and associates – these various intertwining aspects do continue to influence the character and behaviour of each and every individual. The individual culture cannot escape completely the influence of societal culture. After all, the culture of a society is the sum – total of the effects of mutual individual reactions. The more the sophistication of society, the better the individual culture.</li>
			<li><strong>Man’s internal search and control:</strong> Through this the impurities which were natural to him disappear and they become simple and touching expressions. Thus his value system becomes delicate and discriminatory. His priorities become refined.</li>
		</ol>
		<p>The first five result in the sixth. The inner sanctity of life is the fruit of refinement of the mind on one side and the refinement of the heart on the other. The perfume that emanates from such a mature life is culture.</p>
		<p>Culture is not a simple thing, it is a Compound. It does not have a single limb, but many. It is the net result of the resolution of many kind of conflict and arrangements. It is like a bouquet of many kinds of flowers; it is like a perfume compounded of ingredients like civet, saffron and such other sweet-smelling ingredients; its interest is because of the manifold components. The beauty exists not because of the similarity in the quality or appearance of objects but in friendship and co-operation of the dissimilarities in other qualities and looks. No single quality or appearance of objects but in friendship and co-operation of the dissimilarities in other qualities and looks. No single quality or appearance when it is by itself is a cause of beauty. The facts are necessary when it is by itself is a cause of beauty. The facts are necessary to make for geniusness of beauty or shapely appearance complete. (1) There should be many forms and qualities, and each shape and characteristic must by itself stand by itself in unison. (2) Each separate thing must melt into the neighbouring forms and virtues and must refine itself – its individuality – to augment the beauty of the totality. Thus each substance must have both the qualities of its own flowering forth and the preparedness of mingling.</p>
		<p>One can see both these things in the parts of a healthy man. The arm will be powerful; but it doesn’t swallow up the nourishment due to the legs. The eyes will be sharp but it doesn’t deafen the ears. There will be the efficiency of each organ as well as mutual friendly feeling. It is because of this there is concordance; This is mutual agreement, this is propriety.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
