<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>samskrt</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-011">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Individual and Society</h1>
		<p><strong>I</strong>s Culture born of the individual or the society? Is it embedded in the individual or the society? This question arises from the assumed feeling that the individual and society cannot exist independently of each other. For those who are experienced in worldly affairs, it is clear that this distinction has no foundation. Home, birth, profession and the political system – all these influence the individual every moment. The individual also exercises his influence on them unceasingly. Thus culture will keep on getting shaped by the mutual influence of the individual and society.</p>
		<p>Aren’t there divisions like birth, caste, race, region in the human world? In the beginning these divisions happened because of natural causes. The geographical and atmospheric factors would have shaped the bodies and minds of people. Afterwords their religions affiliations give a turn to their mental attitudes. Their economic situation and employment circumstances shape their character and behaviour. Similarly the history of their country determines their virtues and vices. Thus one account of innate comes various practices, behavioural patterns will have taken root in different societies. The differences in birth, race, category and caste have happened because of these differences in practices and traditions. These groups are not artificially generated by an individual or a group. Nobody has broken something which was a whole. By birth itself, the sibling had ten branches. And neither is it a matter for a lacuna. The beauty of the bush is because of the ten differences of the ten. What is desirable to us is not the destruction of the variety. The melting of variety – not the monotony of a sameness but a synthesis. When the “saaru” (hot porridge) is tasty, the salt and the sour don’t have to become proper; pepper also is incapable of becoming sour and salty; there is neither the necessity for all the three to become jaggery. Each substance must retain its own taste, but it must mix properly. This proper mixture is the taste of “saaru”. Those who know this truth, when they hear slogans like “class-less society”, “caste-less society” cannot but think that they are blind outcries.</p>
		<p>There is no caste or class-wall separating Russia and America. Eating together and inter-marrying is not forbidden there. But why can’t the two of them become a single nation? Or even become friends? Why can’t France and England unite? Why can’t the entire Europe become a single society? It can’t happen; the reason is that the root-cause for the diverse societies, groups and parties are certain natural causes and innate propensities. It is not possible to change those today. When the world (globe) becomes flat like a mat instead of being round, when the sun starts shedding his heat and light with the same intensity simultaneously on India and Siberia, when the wind and the clouds move with the same speed, cold moisture and speed every minute of the day and night, then and only is there a possibility of the human differences dissolving into a single shape and all differences being exterminated. Until that time the differences between human groups exist inevitably in one way or the other.</p>
		<p>Cannot the scientists make all creation into the same single unit by making changes in the composition of the earth and the very nature of the sky and ether? Perhaps they can. If they do that, then what is the difference between that and “Pralaya” – the ultimate dissolution? Isn’t dissolution also a single state? – everything burnt down into ashes! Everything melting into water!</p>
		<p>Then there are not many; everything is impartite; everything is a single unit; but everything lifeless; everything empty, everything a vacuum.</p>
		<p>Life means myriad activities dancing about without the monotony of a single lifeless state. No living being, no animal is completely like another; no form of birth is fully like another. In each individual there is a special quality. This quintessential uniqueness is individuality. The attraction of the world of living entities is because of this inscape of in stress.</p>
		<p>The myriadness and variety is the work of Nature.</p>
		<p>The uniqueness of the Knower, the wise person is to see the oneness of Reality behind the existing superficial myriadness.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
