<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>saṃskṛti</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-013">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Freedom for Culture</h1>
		<p><strong>C</strong>ulture is something that takes place as a result of contact with the world; it is a requisite for worldly life; still its primary entity is the individual.</p>
		<p>Culture can be compared to a large wood or garden. In a garden there will be dozens of varieties of trees, plants, creepers and hundreds of bushes. In this vast society of vegetation the wind of one blows on the other; the shade of one falls on the other; the roots of one touch those of the other; thus the development of one touches and transforms the other considerably. Inspite of all these neighbourly contacts the life of each plant will be its own with its difference. Grass does not become jasmine, the neem does not become mango; the tamarind does not become jackfruit. The height or the shortness of a plant, the shape and width of its branches, the thickness or the thinness of it – are determined by its surroundings and situations. But the smell of its flowers, the taste of its fruits do not change into anything unrecognizable by its neighbourhood. That smell, that taste is the essence of that individual. The collective good qualities constitute the beauty of that garden. The same thing applies to human culture. It is the extent to which the individual culture improves to that extent does the development of the total society of all people happens.</p>
		<p>The same manner in which a plant gives its own flowers and fruits, it cannot forego its own natural inner need in what it takes. The tree selects and absorbs the things it needs from the earth, the water, the wind and the sun; it lets out what it doesn’t need; all that is needed by the sugarcane is not needed by the gram; what is sufficient for the Bengal gram is insufficient for the coconut. Thus the need of each individual entity has its own preference, chosen by its own inner propensity.</p>
		<p>A good gardener knows these individual requirements. He will have known about the price and value of each tree and plant in the beginning itself. Then after considering the differences, he distributes his interests. If a plant that is worth ten points is likely to get affected by one who is worth only five, then he transfers the less profitable one to some other place. Thus knowing the differences between the lesser and the greater, he increases the opportunities for the more profitable ones. He makes room when there is congestion. He pulls out the weeds and clears the ground. He digs a repository of water around the plant. All these are acts of promoting individual merits. A garden is good because of ten good plants; not by a hundred weeds.</p>
		<p>For the betterment of the value of a tribe or a society, the individuals must have unlimited opportunity to develop their own native skills. The real freedom is only this wide-ranging opportunities to express himself – his own self. If a plant has to put forth flowers, it must have the freedom to turn its head in the direction of the Sun, its space to spread its branches under the shade and to absorb the life-living essences of the earth. This kind of freedom that is given finds its justification in the flowers and fruits it puts forth. The story of man’s development of culture is also like that.</p>	
	</section>
</body>
</html>
