<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>saṃskṛti</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-014">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">The Advantage for Situation</h1>
		<p><strong>T</strong>here are certain necessary conditions and advantages for the development of culture. First of all a man must have peace of mind. That peace comes about from well-organized external circumstances. He must have the confidence that his food, his house, his profession and his income – these things which he has organized for himself must continue as he has planned their continuance must be assured. He must never have a suspicion in his mind that they might, sometime, somehow, may be jeopardized. The guarantee regarding his life is the source of his peace of mind.</p>
		<p>Then he should not have the fear that others might interfere in his endeavours. The works that he has undertaken according to his inspiration and mind will continue – he himself is the dictator of his desires – this assurance he must possess.</p>
		<p>Thirdly, he must have leisure. If there is an abundance of worry regarding the income for his livelihood or the anxieties of diminishing his enthusiasm, the equanimity of the mind will be spoilt. A mind without rest is like a house without a front yard and a backyard; it is like a paddy field where sowing starts immediately after the crop has been reaped. We must not forget that for development leisure and rest are a necessary preparation.</p>
		<p>Fourthly, in his surrounding society there must be encouragement for the search for excellence. No matter how brilliant a man, however great he may be as a scholar; he cannot rise much above his situation and atmosphere; no man can escape the influence of his surroundings. To the extent to which a people’s mind is filled with idealism in a society, to that extent will the individual’s encouragement for culture exists. When there is no inspiration for progress in the atmosphere, the effort for cultivation of culture is like an effort to find water by digging a well in a desert. Thus, peace, safety, leisure, desire for progress – these are the prerequisites for the development of culture.</p>
		<p>In our country, at the time of epics and the great works of art were born, the society possessed those characteristics. Kalidasa, Jayadeva, Jakkana, Sayama, Purandara, Tyagaraja – These did not seem to have faced the tyranny of the kings or conquests and onslaughts by enemies or perversity in their social order in the cultivation of their inner self. The attitude of the ancestors was – let the king mind his own business; let the wars be fought by themselves if they have to be fought; let our safety and the household and societal order be under our careful supervision. Now until about fifty years ago, in our country, except some very small villages, in every town there would be at least one or two scholars and artists. The mad slogan – mongering of the positions, crying house for revolution, the laws regarding the distribution of property rights, the amendments of laws and their vicissitudes, the noisy demonstrations due to caste envy – these things hadn’t come in the way and hindered the literary giants and musicians. They would be satisfied being content with the produce obtained from their lands, with the income obtained by following their own family trade and profession and devoting the rest of their time in the study of literature, listening to the praise of the Lord in the Puranas and Harikathas etc. The result of this was reflected in their social conduct and behaviour, their politeness and softness of their speech and mild manner. This is the essence of culture.</p>
		<p>Today’s is a world of competition. No matter where you look – in whatever aspect of life. A thousand people will be fighting each other to secure a place and position in a rat race to be first in the line – for education, for jobs, for trade, for political position and for anything and everything. Competition, confrontation and adventure everywhere. Even a scholar or a teacher has to advertise in a proper place in a newspaper. The aspirants must fill in applications. He must wait at the doors of selection committee members after finding out their convenient time and blow his own trumpet. Even there, there is no entry without publicity. Unless a person struggles and fights with the next man and topples him either by trickery or strength, nobody can earn a living. This egotistic hand to hand and head to head combat is increasing in our country as our contact with other countries is increasing, where the worlds come together, there is a vanity fare. The denser the participation, the greater is the competition. In this exhibitionism each person has to attract attention to himself. That necessitates his patting himself on his back and blowing his own trumpet loud and clear. If he waits for others to recognize him, it may be too late. A man who does not provide himself to the skies does not get to eat.</p>
		<p>But the character of a cultured man is different.</p>
		<p>[When four people gather together to discuss who is virtuous and when they decide to count and start by folding the little finger, that person’s name which does not automatically result in folding the finger enthusiastically, how can the mother who has given birth to him be called a good mother (Sutani) and bringing forth such a man does not make her any better than a barren woman. If she is considered a “mother then who is a barren woman”]</p>
		<p>Which means that when a son is voluntarily admired as a virtuous gentleman, then the motherhood of that mother invites respect. One who cannot win respect that way and he himself has to push forward and advertise himself “I am not inferior to anyone” and one who has to invite himself to a dinner when nobody invites him (a popular proverb in Kannada), the woman who has given birth to such a man, her motherhood is not in any way superior to barrenness – such is the opinion of our ancestors.</p>
		<p>In our political establishment in electing a candidate, a man who gets six votes is considered better than the man who gets only five. Those who derive satisfaction by such recommendations, it would not be out of place for them to read and contemplate on the meaning of the above stanza.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
