<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>samskrt</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-015">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Culture and Government</h1>
		<p><strong>O</strong>urs is an age of heavenly dreams. The intention of our political policy is the upliftment of everybody. Our goal is universal equality. Our approach to religion is mutually restritive. In the name of general good, everybody must be pressurizing everybody. No one should leave anyone alone. No one should have the opportunity to be left in peace. The people should not leave the government alone; the government should not leave anybody alone. What should be eaten; how much; what should be worn; how much, what should be sung; what should be heard; what should be learnt, what should be spoken – all these are prescribed by either the government or by the society in our new dispensation. Now the individual is only the footwear of a monster. The likes and dislikes of society are not a result of culture, the taste and desires are only the imitations of other people; whatever makes our tongues water, it is good for us. Whatever glitters is gold; whatever is smooth and polished is a precious stone. Perpetual motion without looking before and after is our “Karmayoga”. Sensory perceptions is our main proof. Feeding the senses and pampering them is our supreme happiness. Such things are today our notion of progress. When this is the ideal of our national leaders, where is the room for individual freedom? Where is the value for culture? </p>
		<p>For true culture the progress of the inner soul is of greater importance than that of physical and empirical progress. What it desires is not pampering and pondering to the senses, but our inner self-searching. Its main target is not society but the individual. Its way is not the confusion of the higher and the lower. But the discrimination is between the two. Culture does not accept blindly the new-tangled notions of equality and non- difference without examining them. Only so far as the rules and regulations of society are supportive of an co-operative to the individual’s character-building and its purification, they are beneficial. To the extent where individual life does not endanger the good of the society, there the individual’s own freedom should not be tampered within the name of society or nation. The loss affecting the individuality of the individual is a loss pertaining to the nation. This is the lesson of culture.</p>
		<p>We have no opportunity to know the extent of the inner workings of the ways of culture that have been understood by our national leaders who are crying hoarse about culture. They are showing their love of various religions and various persuasions. At one time they say they want private initiative. At another time they say they want nationalization. At one time publicity for social equality; at another time encouragement for personal power. At one time a secular government, at another time a religion – oriented government; today a progressive world- view, the next day devotion to old traditional ways; this minute machine and industrial oriented dedication, the next minute support for rural and village handicrafts. Thus our bosses one dancing this way and that. Are these pre-occupations which are mutually destructive – should these be synthesized into culture, or culture itself is paramount?</p>
		<p>The day on which culture becomes important enough for us when all dual perceptions are merged in its light, there may be a complementary understanding, but it doesn’t look as though the stars are favorable for culture at the present juncture.</p>
		<p>Culture is a great achievement. Government and politicians might keep invoking its name while forgetting its meaning and spend time taking shelter in its shade. We can, however, individually and severally earn and achieve culture at least to some extent. Let us take it as far as we can through personal effort and dedication.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
