<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>saṃskṛti</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-016">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Questions for Indian Culture</h1>
			<p><strong>I</strong>ndian culture is a composite thing. It has come into existence as a result of many types of emotional states, various types of situational inspirations and their integration. One can say that its main root are the Vedas. In that mountain range there are many peaks. The verbal totality of the Vedas as we know it today has taken thousands of years to take this shape. Beginning with the worship of nature deities like Indra, Varuna, Agni and Vayu and spreading through sacrifices like Agnisthoma, Vajapeya and Rajasuya and finding fruition and culmination in the philosophical concept of the oneness and non-duality of Jeeva and Brahman, containing within itself the vision of hundreds of sages and saints, developed through various thoughts and arguments in dozens of stages it has come into existence. In addition, injunctions from a variety of Dharma sutras, Grityasutras and Smriti nibandhana – all such do’s and don’ts incorporated into the others, already mentioned. These set forth spiritual, secular, family and societal conduct. Based on these Sruti (Super/Non human scriptures and smrities (sayings of incarnations of God as in Bhagavadgita and the wise works of sages and saints), the Ramayana and Mahabharata have given a definite direction to the life of our people. The Vedangas or branches or off-shoots of the Vedas like the fine arts of music and architecture have been refining the mental attitude of people. Even the social forces separated from Sruti and Smriti including the questions and problems arising from them have been pictures history, myth and legend and literature. New attitudes, modes of thought and moral standards have been born and come into vogue. Thus the primary substance for Hindu culture has been the sum total of Veda, the Dharma Sastras, History, Myth and Legend, Tradition and respect for the holy sages and saints. Within this vast complex of basic, original culture have arisen many regional and class cultures. India is a very vast country, isn’t it? From the Himalayas to Rameswaram, from Kolkata to Mumbai, the quality of the land and the air changes every fifty miles. Within the Mysore State there is a considerable difference in the customs of Hassan and Kolar. In addition to the nature-born external differences, there are language differences, caste, religion and creed differences, differences in conduct and habits have also been born. As a result of this, within the fold of Hindu society there are hundreds of regional and class distinctions creating weales within weales and though not in mainstream culture, in certain aspects is manifold. In addition to all this, in the last one thousand years the influence of the Muslim religions and practices, education and culture have mingled. For hundreds of years the Arab and Parsee influence of people of foreign countries – is seen in literature, music and architecture on Hindu life. After that came the Western influence. Here influence of various sciences that came with Christianity and English literature are important. The functions of the scientific disciplines took the shape of – asking questions like “How is that?” “Why is this?” and opening up a questioning attitude, encouraging freedom of thought, conducting research through novel examinations and new thought to discover sources of the power of nature, acquiring new machines and through them increasing social comforts, inspiring social reformation etc. The necessity for our sage-like intuition to mix with the modern achievements in science has arisen. Thus Indian culture has been growing through a thousand influences.</p>
			<p>Generally the culture of all countries is similar. In England, in addition to their natural native tradition has joined the influence of the cultures of Greece, Rome, France and Germany and the influence of the various categories of Christianity and finally the social changes brought about by the contact with India. Thus the result of various types of origins are unceasing characteristic of culture.</p>
			<p>A very important fact in human history is that in the last 300-400 years the distance between various countries has diminished and a mutual contract constantly increasing. In these interactions of the peoples, each country and each section of society has many palaces which are multi-storeyed with dozens of doors and windows wide open, and receiving light and breeze from all directions spreads out their perfume in every direction. It is the opinion of Mahatma Gandhiji that we should look upon other cultures with an understanding eye, incorporate certain select aspects into ours and augment the uniqueness of our rich heritage.</p>
			<p><em>“I do not want my house to be walled in on all sides, nor my windows to be shut. I want the cultures of all lands to blow about my house as freely as possible; but I refuse to be blown off my feet by any of them. I refuse to live in other people’s houses as an interloper, a beggar or a slave”.</em></p>
			<p class="author"><em>-M.K. Gandhi</em></p>
			<p>Great rivers like Ganga and Brahmaputra while flowing absorb tens of small rivers on the way and the waters are seen from a myriad directions near the ocean. Like that river, culture has one source at birth, in a life’s progress many; origin is one but in modification and transformation world-wide.</p>
			<p>Culture is like an ancient banyan tree. It fixes itself in the ground in the space of a couple of yards thus comparatively in a limited area. But its head rears up sending forth branches and sub-branches spreading forth in all directions reaching out towards the sky sucking forth succor from the air from all winds and gives shelter to thousands of all varieties of birds. If the level of the roots it is firmly fixed, at the level of its head is unlimited and free. Culture is also like that. As its origin it is monocentric, belonging to a single society, a single country. But at the level of yielding fruit in its effect, it is many splendoured and formed out of many societies, extremely extensive. It connects the particular and individual with the universal and the general. Its one end is the individual, the other end is the whole world. It spreads from the limited to the unlimited. Thus culture, starting as it does with a single source – a single society and a people – as it keeps on growing, it incorporates into itself the essence of the entire universal experience, becomes a separate wealth. Thus culture is a combination of the individual and universal.</p>
			<p>We have perceived above what the inner essence of Indian culture is – (1) The sublime level of the Self (2) From that vantage point the order and levels of the four goals of life (3) Consequent order in keeping with Dharma – These three are the foundational concepts of Indian culture. The necessity to accommodate these in the various foreign elements is a necessity that has been recognized by everyone in our country now. This Endeavour of integration is by no means easy, because the value system of the westerners and others is fundamentally different from that of Indian standards. The supremacy of the self which we uphold is not generally seen in their conduct of worldly affairs. They give the first priority to creature comforts and the means of obtaining them, not to the realization of the Self as we do in our culture. Even in this we and they are mutual opposites in a way. But still worldly contact has become unavoidable. We cannot give up completely the influence of Europe and America; we cannot condemn them as being intrinsically bad. We have to accept that there are many agreeable aspects in them. This being the case, while incorporating those other cultures into ours, we have to determine their merits and defects from our point of view. The enjoyment-oriented freedom of the Western countries, the alround equal opportunities for the common man, the democratic ideal, the ultimate judgment of society and its acceptance – all these aspects must be re-examined by the Indians in the light of their view of self-Realization, and its ultimate value and importance. This is a job which can be accomplished by a committee of wise men taking their own time and it cannot be done by ordinary common men and in an emotional state and through argument.</p>
			<p>[Now if you entertain any doubts in matters of duty or conduct, you should watch carefully how the discriminating intellectuals, upright people, people who are dedicated to truth, those who have conquered anger and other excessive emotional states and those Brahmins who have established themselves firmly in Dharma – you have to follow their example].</p>
			<p>To sum up, every Indian, while adopting foreign institutions and traditions, if he doesn’t blindly imitate them in everything and remember distinctly the principle “There is such a thing as an Indian view: All changes and difference must be such that they do not clash with our Indianness” – if they act according to this principle, then the synthesis of our own and Western modes might be beneficial to us and bring benefits to the world.</p>	
		</section>
	</body>
	</html>
