<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>samskrt</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-">
 		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Worldly Progress</h1>
<p><strong>A</strong> possible misinterpretation has to be avoided here. There is absolutely no contradiction between worldly progress and self cultivation. Among the original ingredients of culture is science; The study of scriptures and the cultivation of art is another part. The knowledge of various natural and social sciences and the attainment of the principle of creation according to scripture is one aspect; another is the awareness of inner reality obtainable by experience of literature and art. The structure that arises on the foundation of these two aspects of truth is culture. There is place in it for inner peace just as much as for the achievement of mental satisfaction and also for providing the means of creature comforts. Culture does not reject worldly wealth; it is all for it; but within certain limits and in a particular order. Culture does not say no to this worldly comforts and scientific achievement; in fact it asserts its necessity. But it says that science must integrate with artistic and philosophical truth, and not shine by itself. Culture does not object new changes in society; it says that it is necessary; but it demands that the new should come a part of the age-old mainstream. Culture doesn’t reject anything good; it says that all kinds of good are essential. But it says that everything must harmoniously blend in a proper manner and be absorbed mutually.</p>	
	</section>
	</body>
</html>
