<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>samskrt</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-018">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Who is a cultured Man?</h1>
		<p><strong>T</strong>he characteristics of a cultured man are basically five:</p>
		<ol>
			<li>The knowledge of one’s own place in the world.</li>
			<li>Our actions – An understanding how it affects others.</li>
			<li>Self-control.</li>
			<li>An integrated view.</li>
			<li>Simplicity.</li>
		</ol>
		<p><strong>Morals (“Neeti”)</strong></p>
		<p>At the conceptual level all these are aspects of our morals and ends or goals. Here the word “Neeti” means that which can bring us our intended goal – that which can get us our obtainable objective. Smoothness, politeness, justice – all these are forms of morals. It is a means of bringing two people together. At one end there is the intender, at the other the intended object or individual. The action at one end reaches out to the other end. Thus the personalities of both these individuals according to this method will be moving always from here to there and back from there to here. Therefore each individual action that man performs in society, each quality that he shows will have its effect in two places. One pertains to the doer, the other to the person affected. When a man tells a lie it shunts and twists the soul of the speaker. It deceives another person. Thus our actions and evil actions affects in two ways. One of them is Self-regarding; The other is world-regarding. That behaviour which is beneficial to both is moral. Truthfulness, cleanliness, non-violence, non-covetousness, generosity, control of senses – these are moral principles mutually beneficial. A person who follows these things is pure and develops his inner strength and at the same time does justice to co-workers without being a cheat or being unjust.</p>
		<p>For this kind of dual moral principle, the origin is a respectful attitude. First of all he must have self-respect. A man must maintain a high level in his speech and actions. He must feel within himself a lacuna if he deviates even an inch from this conduct. He must never give room for any situation where he has to feel ashamed about any of his actions even while not being observed by anyone. He must not feel that he is mean even in his own eyes. Thus a man who has confidence in his own integrity of his conscience has self-respect. How can a man without it respect others?</p>
		<p>The second one is the respect he must have in respect of the world. Just as a person has his own individuality, just as he has his own rights and responsibilities – don’t the others too? There is a necessity of giving respect to them also. Just as he should not embarrass his own soul, he must not give room for other’s souls to get embarrassed. To provide strength without hindering the flowering forth of the just desires of others and without hampering their self-respect is the second part of the moral principle.</p>
		<p>Thus in our worldly affairs acting with the two – fold interest of oneself and others, in a mutually beneficial way is moral behavior. When once the moral foundation is strong and firm what can rest on it are the manifestations and decorations of culture.</p>
		<p><strong>The Knowledge of One’s Own Place in the World</strong></p>
		<p>A cultured man will be always searching for an appropriate place for himself in his world. It is certain that each living being has its own place in the world order. But which is that place? Every man has the difficulty of finding out its limits and limitations. Here a little experience may be given as an example. It happened when I was a small boy. In order to ward off the evil effects of the cholera disease which had invaded our village, some friends had arranged a bhajan (singing of songs in praise of God) on every Saturday. The bhajan would take place by turns in various houses. On the day on which our turn came, big carpets had been spread in the living room, bright kerosene lamps had been lit and in addition to that on all four sides oil lamps in artistic metal holders were kept and the entire house had been cleaned up and beautifully decorated. In the centre of the hall, facing the door were placed the large framed pictures of Gods which were decorated with flower garlands. In the central portion of the hall a low table had been put covered by a nice cloth and on it were arranged silver plates with flowers, sandal incense and coconuts. Agarbathis, pleasant smelling incense sticks were exuding sweet scent. I had also seen packets of sugar and dried coconut pieces being made, along with areca nuts folded in betel leaves – This “prasadam” to be distributed after the chanting was over. It was but natural that in my mind enthusiasm was springing forth after seeing all this. In that celebration I and my two friends were sitting near the table right at the centre wearing good clothes. That was the time when the bhajan group would arrive at our house from the temple. The group were just about to step in. Then my grandfather came into the hall to see if the arrangements were alright. The moment he saw me he rushed to me pulled me up and quickly took me to a corner and sat me down. Then a dialogue turned between him and an elderly friend of his:</p>
		<p>Friend : He is just a child; let him sit there.</p>
		<p>Grandfather : Let him stay; but let him stay in a place fit for him.</p>
		<p>Friend : He is the master of the house. Let him stay where he likes.</p>
		<p>Grandfather : Yes; he is the master, that is why he must make room for guests and he must stay in the background.</p>
		<p>Friend : Can he know all this at this young age? Grandfather : No he can’t; but we can. We must teach.</p>
		<p>I don’t remember that I got deflated and wanting in any way when my grandfather did this. After the Bhajan was over and guests had departed, when we were having our dinner, my grandfather talked to me affectionately and said, “child, when you go to a gathering you must know what your place is and stay there”. That is intelligent behaviour. You can know the worth of a clerk by where he places his ink-pot. Similarly when a man is visiting, you can see what kind of man he is by observing the place he chooses to sit. My grandfather added things like “When you sit nobody should say – Don’t sit there” etc. (Nobody should think that such bits of advice have had an effect on me). That advice applies to the large world also. On account of the history of our family, our birth, our educational achievement, our looks and behaviour and also our good fortune – these will have determined our place in society. Along with what is due to us, the rights and honours that are due to others will also have been incorporated in the way we are treated. The understanding of the mutual agreements between us and the others, this knowledge must determine what we should not exceed where we should diminish ourselves in our social conduct. The place determines the responsibility. After comprehending one’s own responsibility, the proper behaviour in keeping with it. On the one hand it is the practice of smooth and gentlemanly behaviour. On the other the flowering forth of one’s strength and ability. Thus the development of man’s capacity in belonging to the world.</p>
		<p>Realizing where one belongs is the mother of the knowledge of one’s duty. In whatever given circumstances on duty is defined by our own inclinations and strength on the one hand and the wellbeing of our surrounding neighbours’ desires and hopes. This is the concept of one’s own dharma – “Swadharma”. The loss between what is external and what is internal is minimized through acting in a manner that maximum benefits are obtained. This manner of conduct is dharma. When an individual looks at dharma from the point of view of special circumstances, that is his “swadharma”. From one’s own position comes his “swadharma”.</p>
		<p>It is common knowledge that many of the ills of our world is because of some people in society trying to aspire for positions beyond their merit and some others occupying important positions and not doing anything to acquire the necessary qualifications afterwards. When a man worth a rupee behaves like a man worth two rupees, the experience of society is like the experience of a man who pushes into his mouth a Marcel of food which is too big for his mouth. That is a tradition of uselessness. There is another kind of preposterousness which is the opposite of this. That is also special with us. That is, a two- rupee worth object. Politeness need not descend to the level of self effacement. Our modesty should not go that far as to make others feel embarrassed. When a man goes to a gathering is well known the people will have an idea where he should sit. If, instead of going there, he exhibits modesty by self abnegation, to the extent to which he pretends, the people also exhibit exaggerated respect towards him. The result is that the lookers on will be disgusted. When a man goes to an assembly of people, he must not draw attention to himself either through his dress code or outlandish behaviour. It is the characteristic of a gentleman to mix with them unobtrusively like sugar in milk or rhythm in music. The main consideration should be not to rock the boat by upsetting the general pattern with his own difference. When a man visits another also, it is the same principle. Just as we expect a certain code of conduct from them, they also expect it from us. That is just. Our apparel and conversation must follow that code. The freedom that does not respect others is actually vanity.</p>
		<p><strong>Our Understanding of the Suggested Desires of Others</strong></p>
		<p>Just now a word has been said about external circumstances. The important aspect of it is the knowledge of other’s intentions which are left unspoken. We must be thinking constantly about the effect of what we do on others. Only the belief that our intention is good does not make our conduct beneficial. We must guess the attitude of others in relation to our intended actions.</p>
		<p>[Even a cow can understand what we communicate either by our speech or by the expression of the eye. Horses and elephants carry the burdens hoisted to their backs without being told to do so. He is wise who knows what to do by intelligent guesswork and not by a verbal order. The knowledge of merely suggested meaning is the mark of wisdom].</p>
		<p>There is no greatness in doing what the others ask us to in so many words. We may act according to their wishes after they have literally, verbally expressed themselves either by a sense of obligation or because of the fear of displeasing them, or by making them feel obliged to us or any other reason apart from knowing their mind. The satisfaction arising in others as a result of this is not of the first degree. They get a superior sort of satisfaction by our action of knowing their unexpressed mental desires. Those others remain tight-lipped on account of a delicate sensibility and don’t openly express their desires may even feel hurt by our crude and selfish actions, unaware of their wants.</p>
		<p>Thus in order to understand what actions may please or displease others, one must place oneself in their position. The aforesaid knowledge of one’s own place must be conjoined with their position. A cultured man is he who asks himself questions like “If I was in their position how discreet would I be? What would I perhaps do? What would be the right thing to do?”</p>
		<p>A cultured man is he who is constantly questioning himself “How would you feel if the others did to you what you want to do to them? If they spoke about you as you have about them. What would happen to you?” Our sacred texts – Sruti, Smriti and Puranas are full of this message.</p>
		<p>These are the words of Isavasyopanishat</p>
		<p>[He who sees all living in himself and himself in all living beings, he is without attachment and fear].</p>
		<p class="text-right"><em>-Bhagavadgita – 6-29</em></p>
		<p>[Himself in all beings and everyone in himself].</p>
		<p class="text-right"><em>-Bhagavadgita – 6- 32</em></p>
		<p>[As if he is everywhere he acts with a sense of equality].</p>
		<p class="text-right"><em>-Apastambha Smriti</em></p>
		<p>[All beings as oneself].</p>
		<p>Such statements are found in a hundred places in the Apastambha Smriti. The Mahabharata and the Smriti Literature abound in such sentences.</p>
		<p class="text-right"><em>-Devala Smriti</em></p>
		<p>[A man who should not do to others what is not good for himself].</p>
		<p class="text-right"><em>-Dakshya Smriti</em></p>
		<p>[He who desires good for himself must see others as he sees himself. Happiness and sorrow for the others will be the same as in his own case].</p>
		<p>Thus in man’s mutual relationships what brings out pleasantness is the empathy arising and of equating himself with others. What makes for lack of interest is the neglect of the consideration for others. If the joints and wheels of this machine called the world have to run smoothly, silently without creating and croaking and rubbing against each other, then the greasy oil must be flowing freely which is the oil of brotherly feeling and mutual understanding. This kind of unification and integration of one with the others is possible with the pre-requisite of the expansion of the feelings of fraternity. With this flowing of the feeling of oneness between self and others the knowledge of the unspoken thoughts of others becomes possible. This is what has been referred to earlier as “Atmaupamya” in the Bhagavadgita (6-32). The means to achieve this are looking straight at Truth, the discriminating worldly wisdom and contemplation of the Ultimate Reality.</p>
		<p>The more a person perceives the depth of human nature, the more a person contemplates on the trials and tribulations of man, when he sees the frailties and foibles of man, what he experiences is not anger but compassion. He cannot criticize too severely the little desires and constrictions. Tolerance, generosity, forgiveness, these are the qualities of paramount importance that a cultured man has cultivated. When he encounters a mistake, he imagines himself in that position and acts accordingly.</p>
		<p>The words of an old man who passed away recently may be recollected here. That is something which I know as a direct witness. The old man in question had lived a good life. Because of some unavoidable family reasons he had to sell his house. The people who bought it had a comfortable dwelling place. The man who sold it had to use that road quite frequently. If he met the man who owned the house now, he would make polite enquiries whether he had found happiness in it. Once the new owner invited the old man into the house. He begged the old man with genuine devotion, “Please come, in, see the place and give us your blessing”. He did not agree to go inside. He said “Please don’t compel me”. The owner stopped the invitation right there and kept quiet. After the old man walked a bit further his grandson who was with him asked him “Why did you say so?” The answer of the old man was this “Child, if I had entered the house, would not old memories come crowding in? - How nice is the house now, which was once ours! Thoughts like what a pity we could not retain it would arise and may be it would have given rise to envy! Is it a good thing? It is possible some evil would come their way! Why should we give room to such bad things? May God protect them. Why should our misfortune affect them?” This is the attitude of cultured people.</p>
		<p><strong>(3) Self Control</strong></p>
		<p>The way to facilitate the others desires, is through self- control. The selfishness that is hidden within and will be taking hundreds of subtle forms. It will be emanating deceiving our knowledge. No matter how hard we try to hide our desires of ambitions like amassing wealth either in cash or kind, the intense fondness for the object of our desire, the hankering after power, the drive for fame, our actions controlled by them will be quite obvious for others. At least once in a way, when the others object to it, we will realize it to some extent. At least to the extent that man wants to hide them by protesting that he doesn’t have such defects – to the extent of not showing those traits – he will have a sense of shame.</p>
		<p>Even more latent than these vain desires which rear their heads sometimes, there are certain pet attachments. We parade them by giving nice names like justifiable pride, partiality to merit, excellence of mind, etc. If our little child utters a fond word, if it does something smart, we feel that we ourselves have done it and broadcast it to the whole world that it can bring about universal admiration. If they start praising the cleverness of their own children, we have no patience to listen to it. We call it a “bore” – a bane. We are great, our child is not like that of others; we are special people – This illusion will be hiding in the depths of our hearts.</p>
		<p>Similarly, the illusion that we are not like the others takes the form of casual conversation. In daily life, every man will find an occasion when he has to speak about others. Some people will be creating such circumstances themselves in addition to existing situations. In such cases, the critical comments on others’ merits and defects will be taking place with great enthusiasm. Like a goldsmith weighing an ornament in a balance, we put the other’s characters in a balance. Then if someone asks “Why are you interested so much in others?” We reply that “Such judgment of merits and de-merits are in the interests of the world”. We hesitate to admit that by de-bunking the greatness of others we derive a sort of satisfaction in our lives. We forget to ask ourselves who gave us the authority to sit in judgment over the character of others. Usually the people in public life who come to power behave as if fate has immersed them with the authority of the job “you go and improve the world”. If they don’t have such a self-confidence, their job cannot be carried out with enthusiasm. But the same self-confidence when it transgresses carefulness becomes the course for injustice on account of over- confident showmanship. As a matter of course, every member of society will have a responsibility, at least to some extent of sitting in judgment over other people’s actions. However, only to the extent to which it is absolutely necessary without overstepping the limit of its duty does a cultured man indulge himself in assessing the merits of others – and reducing the harshness to the maximum extent possible, confining oneself to the limits of one’s duty – that is the caution of the man of culture.</p>
		<p>In a democracy – in a set up where the man who is supposed to be the representative of the country has the power of making laws – the culture which takes the form of giving up the ego may not find much encouragement. Nobody gives way to a person who thinks that his knowledge is limited and abilities are modest and stays back can find a place. Only a fellow who is a go-getter and pushes around and elbows others out will find a place in democracy. This politics of the people will blunt all the niceties of human nature and roughens them.</p>
		<p>Thus selfishness works in various ways in our nature. Secretly, openly, directly, deviously, openly, indirectly – it will be working all the time in all sorts of ways. It cannot be said that it is evil in all circumstance. Just as it has possibilities of injustice it can also work in just ways. So what we have to desire here is not the total destruction of selfishness, not a complete cessation of it but only its orderly control. Selfishness must be tempered. Let there be self-interest; but let it be within limits, let it work, but let it work under control. Let the principle of righteousness determine its ways and means.</p>	
		<p><strong>(4) An Integrated View</strong></p>
		<p>Integration or synthesis means a co-operative endeavour. It is everyone’s experience that in every question, differences of opinion do exist, but when they raise their head, because of them there should be no harm done either to individual friendship or to the unity of society. To see this happening, we must examine the various views, put together their veracity and arrange them in a mature manner. Synthesis is this kind of orderly adjustment. Bhagavan Vedavyasa has decreed it especially with regard to the beliefs of other faiths. That policy of integration deserves to be applied to politics, economics, commerce, matters of law and to all aspects of human activity. No single faith possesses all virtues and complete truth; We have to examine each argument with patience and sympathy; what is gleaned from it and to whatever extent, we must integrate with similar virtues in other points of view. For human values to rise to the maximum height, such a synthesizing process is the only means. Among the types selfishness, man’s love of his own faith is one. ‘Faith’ means opinion, belief, feeling. One’s own faith does not merely mean what we have inherited from our forefathers and from our surrounding society only and its values; The expression “one’s own faith” indicates all opinions about all subjects. This clinging to one’s own beliefs is the root cause for all disputes and quarrels. Very often when we are talking to friends we say “Didn’t I tell you this that day itself?” or “I have been saying this right from the beginning!” We have such faith in our own intellectual convictions. Many self-styled world-teachers and leaders of men have greater attachment to their brain-children than to their actual physical children born to them. This excessive attachment is the root of all astheistic arguments.</p>
		<p><strong>(5) Lopsided View, not correct</strong></p>
		<p>Many years ago in North of our country there was a holy man called “Lavanananda Swamy” (Lavana in Sanskrit means salt). His view was “Salt is the penacia in the world; if you keep eating salt, all diseases will disappear. No other medicine is of any use”. Similarly there are some devotees of Lord Sri Rama. No matter what mistake you have committed. No matter what your desires, if you just utter the two syllabals “Ra” and “Ma” all your sorrows will vanish and all your desires will come true. This is the argument of the devotees of Lord Rama. Such a poet has said:</p>
		<p>[In the forest, the hunters (the Sanskrit-speaking ones!) were going about saying:-”Let us move about in the forest. (“Charama” means “moving around” and the sound “rama” is contained in that word. Let us rob the things – jewels and clothes – of the travelers “Apaharana” means “steal” but has “rama” in it. Then we will cross the river. “Tarama”s meaning “cross over” has the word “rama”. Then we will have no fear. “Na smaramah” meaning “no fear” has the letters “rama”. Thus when they traversed, because the word “rama” was attached in the words they used, they attained Liberation].</p>
		<p>This is a travesty of devotion of Lord Rama. This stanza may be admired because of the clever use and repetition of the word. But where is the devotion to Sri Rama in these words? Is a sincere and genuine devotion seen here? And, for Liberation mere devotion without self-knowledge enough? Should there not be a synthesis of discrimination and practice of it there?</p>
		<p>The trust in salt of Lavanananda and the trust in the holy name of Sri Rama – such trust are the slogans of many of our political and social reformations. “Ahimsa is the invincible weapon;” “There is no way but Khadi way (the hand-woven cotton fabrics)”; “Better anarchy than slavish compulsions” “Those who don’t want industrialization will have to go a begging in the streets”. Such ear splitting street slogan shouting shatters the very atmosphere of our times. There may be a grain of truth in these. It there no taste in salt? Is there no merit in the chanting of the Lord’s name? But in addition to the presence of limited good, there will also be attached a great deal of lack of any merit. In all human languages blunders and bloomers exist inevitably. Only through multiple perspectives it is possible to avoid them. Whether it is something said by Mahatma Gandhi or by Jinnah, no matter how big a man he is, unless it is subjected to independent scrutiny, it cannot be accepted. No matter from what mines gold has come, unless it is tested by fire, it does not become pure.</p>
		<p>Maharshi Manu has said even about the pronouncement of a sage:</p>
		<p>[Only that which remains good grain after having been filtered in the fine perforated pan of faultless logic is Dharma; not the rest].</p>
		<p>The same opinion has been justified and defended by the famous commentator Kullukabhatta through an ancient pronouncement.</p>
		<p><em>- Manu 12 – 106 -Manu. 12 – 113.</em></p>
		<p>When there is a necessity in the case of the Scripture itself, what is there to say about the views of human beings? In our times, the facilities and conveniences for the propaganda of religion and faiths have increased to an unprecedented extent. The printing machines are in abundance; paper is cheap; the telephones, newspapers and platforms are a plenty which instead of increasing awareness are augmenting noisy controversies. The singing of the praises of Rama are a balm to the ear; Rama’s banishment to the forest is intolerable even to imagine. So people go to the easy bhajans of Rama; the vow of Rama is not even recollected. It is natural to understand what is easy. The newspapers and the leaders of men prepare their pills of panacea, put them in attractive bottles with catchy labels pasted on them and sell their ideas. It is easy for people to swallow these pills. It is difficult to examine their composition. People do what is easy. Thus atheistic philosophies and perverse arguments have sprung up in the world. It is on account of this that there is envy among various groups; enimity between nations; from this comes the jealousy between castes and wars among people.</p>
		<p>It has already been mentioned earlier that in matters of opinion stubbornness is improper. Truth has a thousand forms. The proper application with taste and finesse of these take ten thousand shapes. Therefore to insist that one question has only one answer is far from truth. To get from one place to another one can’t have a straight road as the crow flies. The straight road may be full of pitfalls and difficult to negotiate. It may look like a shortcut but in fact may be a circuitous one. The path that looks distant for the eye may actually be quite close to the feet to walk across. Thus if anyone asks “which is the nearest route from Mysore to Bangalore, two or three answers will have to be given according to the questions – “for whom?” and “in what vehicle?” Depending on each condition different answers are correct. In all human dealings, a single definite, final answer “this is so” cannot be given at all. Such being the case, wherever there are such differences of opinion each one should adopt a conciliatory tone and say in a compromising way “could be”, “It could be that way too”. Then the aspects of differences between various opinions will decrease and points of agreement will increase. In today’s world the argumentative good manners is missing. All people will be attached to a particular point of view, and will take a strong fanatical position. It is these fanatical following and strong allegiances that are mainly responsible for the turmoils of the present day world. If the world should give up these extremes and become a friendly place, this diplomatic “may be” attitude must be taught and that culture should spread.</p>
		<p>Man’s life, like the confluence of rivers like Ganga and Brahmaputra contains the hundreds of powers and speeds getting merged. This great conflict is as interesting as natural. That interest in the confluence is when man barricades and bridges their different speeds and gives it a certain direction. That is culture. That is diplomacy in dealing with worldly affairs. That is the light which pleasantly lights up life. There are hundreds of things which we want moment by moment in our lives. The Sruti itself has said “Asmin loke bahavaha kamaha” (Taithiriya 3 Br 13 – 9) which means that there are many desires in the world. Culture is that which informs us which will have to be obtained to what extent to be within limits should be eschewed to avoid excess.</p>
		<p>In a kingdom the agriculturists inform what is good for them and request that it should be given to them. The merchants know what is beneficial to them and demand it. The city dwellers look to their comfort. The villagers beg for their conveniences. If you look at them separately, each demand looks just. But there is a greater entity, above and beyond all these, encompassing all these and many more entities. That is the country. Keeping that totality in mind and its good, doing justice to all sections without hindering the progress of the others is the efficiency of the minister. When a garland of many jewels worn by different parties, are sewn together through a thread of synthesis passing through all of them and making the whole thing into a single garland – that is the man who is politically astute. That which we call right taste in the proper proportionate blending of salt, sour etc. in cooking, that which we call melody in music which is an integration of sruti and laya (sound and tempo), that which we call proportionate representation of various parts in a statue, that which we call a diplomatic policy of dissolving differences of various kinds in administration, such a creation of synthesis which is satisfactory, such a self-controlled behaviour, such a universally beneficial, genuine, enlightened originality is what is called culture.</p>
		<p>What is prefatory to synthesis is the decision regarding priorities. Among the myriad things we want, there is not a single one which is unnecessary; but there should be a fixed order of priorities in their importance. Some come first. Some later. This relative position is the basis for synthesis. Determining the value of various things and arranging them in steps, from the point of view of ultimate value of inner importance is the synthesizing principle. That is the organization of our desires and duties. There is nothing unjustly treated; nothing gets greater importance than what it deserves.
		</p>
		<p><strong>Cleansing Policy</strong></p>
		<p>The cultured individual has the same cleansing attitude regarding the clinks and quirks of the world and adopts the same technique as a good surgeon does regarding a sick patient who is suffering from a disease pertaining to a particular organ. The surgeon may have to resort to the use of knife and scissors in order to set right the diseased growth of flesh in the stomach, or untangle a knot of nerves or cure the sore of the bone. But he first thinks “Can’t it be set right without an operation?” Until his conscience says that it is unavoidable, he cannot touch his instruments. And after he has decided to operate he prepares methods like “chloroform” in order to assuage the pain to the patient and takes every precautionary measure. When it becomes absolutely impossible to avoid pain, he tries to reduce the pain to the maximum extent possible. And then cuts off the minimum portion of the nerve or the bone. He doesn’t remove even an iota more than necessary. He will be all the time concerned lest he should over act. He cures the wound in the earliest possible time after the operation.</p>
		<p>A cultured man doesn’t approve the quirks and the perversities in the behaviour of the people around him. But he doesn’t impatiently interfere either with the course of reforming them. He is always engaged in the endeavour of correcting himself; and correcting his near and dear ones. But in that process of correction there is no crudeness. He doesn’t shout about his own stubborn convictions; his face doesn’t show him with red, inflamed eyes and the grinding teeth. When it becomes absolutely unavoidable for him to register his dissent he shows only the force and power that are just enough and never shouts raising his voice. With his discourse and conduct he makes the disagreemnt unobtrusive.</p>
		<p>A truly cultured man acts as a mother does when she is punishing her child or when a faithful wife corrects her husband. He answers with a friendly attitude. The loud – mouth response of the others doesn’t make him shout about; the contorted faces of others doesn’t take away his pleasantness. If the main characteristic of culture is to be summarized in a nutshell it is “lack of crudeness”. A certain amount of strength becomes necessary in worldly dealings. Some occasions do arise when the voice has to be raised. A man cannot always remain a ball of butter or a lump of jaggery. It doesn’t always make for righteousness. Dharma or right conduct itself demands bravery and uncompromising attitude sometimes. In such circumstances the cultured person doesn’t go haywire and becomes hard, just as hard as is justifiable in order to set right the world. The cane of the schoolmaster is sharp at one end and affectionate at the other end. The hardness of the cultured man is just such. There is no roughness, no perversity, no self forgetfulness in it. In everything his is a smooth way, a delicate step. A strict behaviour without ostentation, a slap that doesn’t hurt.</p>
		<p><strong>Elegant Simplicity</strong></p>
		<p>Above all, a sense of proportion – humour – elegance – simplicity which means an attitude which searches for what renders anything interesting and bringing it out, it is very rare indeed when there are no bad qualities and seeds of sorrow in human situations. In whatever we see in our daily life the sorrowful content predominates. The cultured individual searches for beauty inquisitively in the midst of this mess. He searches for pleasantness in the midst of bitter circumstances. When misfortune lands him in a desert, instead of being enveloped by depression, he doesn’t stand resourceless but searches for a cool “oasis”. That is his nature. He is one who searches for a footpath in a dark forest, who wide-eyed, looks out for a lantern-light in a village hut in the forest of the night. This is the quality which our ancestors have called the capacity to see good. It seems the swan can separate milk from water in water-mixed milk, takes only milk and rejects the water. It seems Lord Parameshwara, when both the moon and poison came out of the ocean, put the moon on this head and retained the poison in his throat to prevent it from affecting others. This partiality for good and rejecting evil is the mark of good taste. A cultured man retracts his mind’s eye in all circumstances from inauspicious things and directs his gaze on the auspicious which may be hiding behind the other. He tries to instill the hope of light in the hearts of the depressed with darkness. In the midst of people whose faces are taut and tight-lipped he says something humorous to relax their mood. In a lackluster situation he will create an opportunity for laughter. He will turn our attention from the dried up bark and branches of a tree to fresh sprouts and towards green buds. He believes that the fresh will be behind the stale, that green lurks behind a fossil and this is so always, everywhere. He is a man with a heart. In him will be swelling forth the essence of human love, the essence of sympathy and compassion and the essence of friendship. As a result of the efficacy of that elixir all his bark and all his moral principles will be felt as salutary by the people. That refinement and that beauty is what renders human life attractive. That is the inner essence of culture.</p>
		<p>Even in simple enjoyment there is a question of propriety. He (the cultured person) will also have his share of joy and sorrow like the others. But he doesn’t broadcast the depth and width of those experiences. When he sees the petals of a flower opening up, his mind also might open up and eyes beam. But his hand doesn’t stretch forth to pluck it. When his efforts bring forth victory and triumph his heart may respond and his lips part. But its sound doesn’t break forth beyond the line of these teeth. In his laughter there is no laughtiness; in his pride there is no vanity. Even when he picks up and fondles his child, he looks this way and that. Because he doubts whether it will affect somebody’s mental equilibrium. That kind avoidance of excess – that kind of self-control – is the hallmark of culture. It is good manners which doesn’t ask for fame, it is a happiness that doesn’t make noise.</p>
		<p>The world-machine is a very big one. Its wheels and joints are in hundreds. If these things have to turn smoothly without a creaking and cracking noise and stop altogether, its wheels and joints must be well oiled now and then, quite constantly, infact. That smoothening oil is culture. With his moral devices which are consigned by his sophisticated vision, with his balanced and friendly policies of behaviour – the burden of our life will be lightened at least to the extent of bearability, the tiresomeness of the journey will be forgotten. Culture is the architectural device which makes the road smooth the path for the chariot of Dharma.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
