<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>saṃskṛti</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-019">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">A Man of Taste</h1>
		<p><strong>T</strong>he man of taste is a citizen of the kingdom of mind. The mind is not outside the body. Therefore the world of the body is not far away for the man of taste. The commerce of the mind is only through the body. Though this is the case of the main focus of the man of taste is more on the workings of the mind rather than those of the body</p>
		<p>Let us look at an example. Among the acts of commission pertaining to the body and the mind, the most direct and famous is eating. Hunger is natural to all living beings. Everyone wants a meal. But there are two kinds. (1) One uncultivated (2) A man of cultured taste. The ordinary man wants his stomach full. For the man of taste not only does he want to fill his stomach but he desires a perfume to envelop his mouth. For the common man quantity is important, for the man of taste quality.</p>
		<p>All young ladies want to wear flowers in their braids. For the uninitiated “sevantige” flowers – and a load of them; for the sophisticated, “jasmine”, just one or two.</p>
		<p>The ordinary man eats and belches himself to sleep. The cultured waits for scent, flowers and music. The satisfaction of the uninitiated is in the body; that of the man of taste is in the mind.</p>
		<p>What is eaten, seen, heard and enjoyed are important for the body. Thus says the uninitiated. The man of taste wants it to untaste into the mind and permeate the soul of man.</p>	
	</section>
</body>
</html>
