<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>saṃskṛti</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-020">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Culture not by Books Alone</h1>
		<p><strong>I</strong>n our country culture is a very ancient concept. It is anterior to book learning. Earlier than modern European civilization took root here, highly cultured people who were not literate were found in abundance. If any person had to be complemented, he would be called a “sabhya” or a well-behaved, upright, soft- spoken person. This fit for assembly – fitness for cultivation in society – was culture. In the villages, the illiterate agriculturists, shepherds and potters were not lacking in culture. They knew very well the difference between the just and the unjust, between the big and the small, the proper and improper conduct and behaviour. The so-called educated people, when there were disputes and differences of opinion among them, would invite these non-literate upright men and respect their decision. Thus it is clean that there is no inevitable connection between book learning and cultured right conduct</p>
		<p>How did culture spread so widely then? Our ancestors seemed to have understood the nature and pathways of the true essence of culture. Three or four aspects are important here.</p>
		<ol>
			<li>Culture is a living entity. It grows by itself life a plant, like a child. It is not like a machine manufactured product.</li>
			<li>Like a flower in a plant, from inside man it comes out after growing. It cannot be pushed in. It is not like the ornament fixed from outside.</li>
			<li>It is pervading in all areas of life like a perfume. It is not seen only in one or two parts, being absent elsewhere.</li>
			<li>It does not come into existence because of our hurry. It takes its own time. It won’t do if we want to speed up the process of child’s teething, talking, and walking. Culture is acquired according to the inner propensity, intellect and preparedness of each individual.</li>
		</ol>
		<p>Culture is the fruit of the general development of society and it occurs by itself – like the strength of the body – when the food and the sporting habits are alright, the strength is self- acquired. There is no need for any special effort. A characteristic of health is strength. Similarly if the organization of learning and education is proper, culture grows by itself. A separate propaganda for it is unnecessary. Our ancestors had found this out. They knew that indirect influence was more fruitful than direct propaganda. This is the reason why they established the indirect influence in every aspect of life through stories, poetry, music architecture and aesthetic appeal. The varied popular cultural arts and activities like bhajans, narration of puranas, gospels like harikathas, recitation of epics, ballad-singing, various types of stage productions like Bhagavatarata, Yakshagana and drama – these were the artistic means to achieve the end of preservation of culture. Things like temples, towers and pinnacles, processions and religious gatherings performed the same function for attracting people and having a hold on them. It is the art of dissolving the artistic teaching in a tasty connection to drink. Just as in tasty rasam, health – promoting and medicinal charactered ingredients like, pepper, cardamom and other herbs and roots are mixed resulting in improved taste performs the function of digestion – doing good without our conscious knowledge – so too the fine arts, through providing aesthetic pleasure and entertainment purify them. The elevation of the spirit through engendering the memory of the sacred in the vicinity of a holy spirit is the origin of culture.</p>
		<p>Creation of the atmosphere of spiritual elevation was the objective of our ancestors. They suspected that direct teaching and slogan-mongering might not only be fruitless but even counter-productive. Institutions like temples, charity houses, maths or monasteries and places of pilgrimage – all such institutions became the means of uplifting the minds of people from the mundane to a higher level. Ritual worship and listening to sacred myths and legends came in handy to supply courage, patience and belief in their moments of doubt. Incidentally they taught them the discrimination between the higher and the lower and a sense of humility. What else is culture? The culture of our people is the inner cultivation of the result of such virtues for thousands of years without fuss and hurry, without artificiality and without noise and fanfare. Fortitude in misfortune, partiality for justice while surrounded by injustice, contemplation of the spiritual in the midst of the secular – these are the qualities that have been the protective armor for the Hindus for thousands of years. This is not the job of publication and propaganda. It is the endeavour of natural wisdom. Our people have recognized the value of culture themselves and have accepted it. That is why culture has survived.</p>	
	</section>
</body>
</html>
