<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>saṃskṛti</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-021">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Prospect</h1>
		<p><strong>T</strong>he future of culture in our country is not very encouraging at present. The ideals and traditions of old have eroded to a great extent in our lives. New commitments have not yet come to us. The new culture that has come to us from Europe are only at the face value. In matters of food and recreation the old restrictions are loosening, the moral bindings of people have been shaken. The past generations believed in truth, (“Sathya”) sanctity of promises (“Niyattu”) and spiritual merit (“Punya”). Even if we say it was a superstitious belief, as a result of it one could see in their behaviour a certain strength, a certain confidence and a certain reliability. Today the fear of sin (“Papa”) is vanishing. The belief in other words and after life has withered away. Even the memory of what is called God is becoming rare. If the necessity of God is felt anywhere, it is only in selfish circumstances. Only the visible world – its momentary experience this has become the be – all of everything and the mind has become incapable of comprehending unseen truth and the eternal existence. Because of these reasons, the here and the now has become more valuable than the other – worldly and the old moral and ethical values have turned topsy – turvy.</p>
		<p>To start with the opinion of those who learned the English alphabet became the starry – eyed brilliance. The government job and regular salary went to their heads like heady wine. Those have-nots got sand in their eyes and the merchant class joined hands with those in power, prepared for foreign trade. The arrogance of money increased. Pretty sights and table-meals wiped out the name of heaven. What the bank accepts is good fortune; what the mouth admires is happiness; what is enjoyed is what is gained; what is saved is an investment – such beliefs have been spreading among people. The money culture has overshadowed the civilization of agricultural produce.</p>
		<p>There is yet one other factor for perturbing our minds. The scientific education brought in by the English shook the roots of our culture to a considerable extent. Let alone the condemnatory slogans indulged by the priests in conversion propaganda. More than that was the influence the sciences brought that came to us through English. This scientific probing was question – oriented. “How is that? Why is this? Where is heaven? What is the proof for the existence of God? What is the evidence for the workings of Karma? Who is the witness for re- incarnation?” Such questions eclipsed the old beliefs. But this eclipse did not spare Europe either. Even there, the old religions upheavals took place. It happened with us also. But of late there are signs of the eclipse ending there. The necessity for re- valuation and re-thinking in the re-examination of certain conclusions reacted. Therefore the danger to religious beliefs from science is decreasing. Now science does not reject religions injunctions. This is a heartening matter to those who have a confidence in the culture of the Indian sub-continent.</p>
		<p>Is there a place for Indian culture in the present-day world? If it has to survive and grow, should it incorporate certain equations in its structural aspects? What type of things are they? Just as they are important question, they are equally complex and difficult. If the present writer attempts to answer this briefly it would take some such shape as this: That spiritual outlook, that curtailing force of sensual pleasures, that moral overview which controls excessive hoarding and acquisition instinct because of our scriptural heritage, these characteristics are necessary for the world of today. Unless all nations accept that as their own national cultural principle, there will be no peace for people and human population in general. But first of all, we must make it clear to ourselves and apply it in our daily life. Are we today in a position to tell others that they should follow our example? Wherever we look in our country today what we see is disorganization, dissatisfaction and lack of proper orientation. Along with this, we have not yet thought fundamentally about the question of how to equate our scriptural tradition with that of the West. Without spoiling the Indianness – without our nation becoming second to anyone in our strength and riches, in a way in which it is highly respected in the eyes of others, other nations, we must equate our culture once again. It is possible only through cogitation and criticisms. Manu’s words are:-</p>
		<p>That outlook is the primary duty of the lovers of India. Through an overview is equation possible.</p>
		<p>There will be an innate opposing force preventing culture from gaining popularity. Culture means no aspect of life becoming excessive; everything being within limits and under control. Such a limited state for most people is without excitement and tame. From this point of view there seem to be two kinds of people. Most people want speed, ostentation and passion. Only just a few desire peace and equanimity. Between Dharmaraya and Bhima, only Bhima is appreciated, preferred and clapped by ordinary folk. Those who admire Dharmaraya are few and far between. At the slightest provocation Bhima twirls his moustache. One who shouts shall I knock down a hill? Shall I drink the ocean? Shall I uproot the tree? Shall I swing my mace and fell the sun? A man who cautions, we should not act in haste; let us weigh the pros and cons; Do we in anyway transgress the righteous path? Such a person is considered a coward. One who is physically aggressive is a brave man; one who is forgiving is a weakling. This is the attitude of most people – especially the 
		young, the well-built and the strong. For them culture is a bland food – fit only for people recovering from illness. It is only natural that it should appear so, isn’t it? Those who can appreciate culture are those who have matured with the experience of suffering. Those who have learnt their lesson of observing those who have gone astray through false enthusiasm for wrong things and immature undertakings can know the value of culture. For the rest it is not the very stuff of life but only an external embellishment.</p>	
	</section>
</body>
</html>
