<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>saṃskṛti</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-022">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">The Words of Emerson</h1>
		<p><strong>I</strong>t has been said above, has it not, that a cultured individual keeps everything under limits as prescribed by the principle of propriety? The American philosopher, Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803-1882) has said – “Culture kills the propensity for excessive importance; it kills his pride in saying My village, my town. When we came out into the street we should leave our loving little children at home and look at the people we meet with a large – hearted discriminatory sense and politeness. No piece of work is worth its while which is done without a feeling of fraternity… The man who has attained fame as a brilliant person would have bought that fame at a great price. His head would be swollen and flying high in an ivory tower. Instead of behaving like a healthy and happy person, he will be jumping about like a madcap. The reason for this inner vanity and egoism is the extension of the external attractions. Their variety is the proper medicine. Acquaintance with the ways of the world, coming into contact with different levels of people, traveling, good medical treatment, philosophical enquiry, art, thinking of religious tenets, study of books, social concern, cultivation of being alone – these are the medicines for the natural pride of man”.</p>
		<p>As the pride in us decreases, so does discontent; and the burden caused by us to the world also gets lessened. The mental attitude (Yoga) of lightening the weight of life is culture. This is Self-cultivation. The word “Culture in English means this inner training, the sophisticating process of the latent Self ”. All this meaning is contained in the following poem of Emerson.</p>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Can rulers or tutors educate<br /> The semigod whom we await?<br /> He must be musical,<br /> Tremulous, impressional,<br /> Alive to gentle influence<br />Of landscape and of sky,<br />And tender to the spirit – touch<br /> Of man’s or maiden’s eye;<br />But, to his native centre fast,<br /> Shall into Future fuse the Past<br />And the world’s flowing fates in his own mould recast.</em></p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
