<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>saṃskṛti</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-024">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">The Ideal Valmiki Upheld</h1>
		<p><strong>T</strong>he great poet Valmiki has upheld the ideal of culture in the shaping of the personality of Sri Ramachandra murhty:</p>
		<p>[He is always tranquil and begins the conversation himself, and he speaks softly. (1) He does not reply roughly to those who speak roughly (2) He is happy always to remember some little favour done to him at some time (3) He never remembers a hundred injustices done to him; the reason for it being the courage and self-confidence vested in him. (4) He has sympathy for the humble; one who knows the Right Path; one who has self-control; one who is pure (5) He has wisdom according to his origin of birth; he respects the Dharma of the warrior class (Kshatriya) as being high (6) He is the repository of all virtues, fair, brave, truthful and simple (7) He has been educated in the goals of life, Dharma (Right conduct) and Artha (wealth) and Kama (desire) by Brahmins and elders. (8) He is blessed with memory power as well as brilliance. (9) He acts with tact in worldly affairs and the traditions of society (10) He has unswerving faith in God; he has firmly established sense of discriminations; he never accepts evil; never speaks evil (11) He is without laziness; never forgets himself; he is aware of the defects in himself as well as in others. (12) He is an adept in Shastras; wise to distinguish the do’s and don’ts. He is capable of surmising the inner prompting of others (13) He is capable of upholding justice in both punishing and rewarding. (14) He knows the proper time and place for earning the goodwill of people and retaining it as well as trampling down evil. (15) He is a good planner in matters of income; and careful in matters of expenditure (16) He is one who has attained a top position in both the company of the learned scholars of scripture as well as in an assembly of mixed talent. (17) One who is efficient in gathering both Dharma (spiritual merit) as well as Artha (money) and enjoying both without lethargy. (18) One who is without envy; one who has conquered anger; one without pride; one without regret (19) One who never shames any living thing; one who never yields to some momentary pressure forgetting righteousness and his own oath not to deviate from it.]</p>
		<p>Let those who want to realize the true nature of culture contemplate on this word – picture of Lord Sri Rama described by our first poet, Valmiki.</p>	
	</section>
</body>
</html>
