<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>saṃskṛti</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-025">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Literature and Culture</h1>
		<p><strong>Some Examples</strong></p>
		<p>Great literary works point out the beauty of cultured behaviour. Let us look at some such examples:</p>
		<p><strong>Rama</strong></p>
		<p>It is well known that when Sri Ramachandra was exiled in the forest the great sages came to him, informed him about the tortures that they were undergoing at the hands of the demons and begged him to protect them. Then, at the beginning itself, they said:</p>
		<p>[Lord, you are a great man – One who knows Dharma and one who has love for it. We are in a position of supplicants. Therefore we have come to you and troubling you with our woes. You must excuse us.]</p>
		<p>How does Rama reply to this humble request?</p>
		<p>[Great sages should not make a humble request like this. Instead, they must order me. I am someone to take orders. I am obedient to them. Though my coming here had a different purpose, it is my duty to carry out your behest. My sojourn in the forest becomes meaningful from it. May my power and valour, joined with that of my younger brother, provide you an occasion for venerable sages like you to witness]</p>
		<p>The humility of Rama, his attitude of veneration regarding the sages, his confidence in and affection for his brother, the way of assuring those who are afraid – these are to be noticed.</p>
		<p><strong>Sita</strong></p>
		<p>At the time of Rama and Lakshmana entering the Dandaka forest, they arm themselves with bows and arrows. Sitadevi entertains a doubt.</p>
		<p>A kshatriya who is armed, like fire near the firewood becomes very potent and in that state of power may return to violence. Indra thought of disrupting the tapas (intense meditation) being performed by a sage and so he took the shape of a warrior and in that disguise gave the sage a powerful sword requesting him to keep it safe for him until he came back to reclaim it. The sage agreed and received it. Then what happened? The sage got enamored by its shine and sharpness and held it all the time, kept on using it and went to hell. The possession of weapons has that effect on the mind.</p>
		<p>“Therefore I am afraid because you, Rama and Lakshmana are armed. You may hurt or harm animals without reason. Beware that these weapons may generate cruel thoughts in your minds. Let not the innocents be affected by you.” After Sitadevi cautions this way, she addresses her husband: “Not that you don’t know what I am telling you. I am not preaching and teaching you. I am only reminding you of what you know very well already. Prompted by the love I bear you, not to feel any lacuna in my great confidence in you and the pride I entertain in your regard, I am thus bringing it to your kind notice.”</p>
		<p>Thus spoke Sita Devi. Observe the courtesy in this remonstration.</p>
		<p><strong>Lakshmana</strong></p>
		<p>As is well known when Sri Rama and Lakshmana came to Kishkinda, they became friends with Sugriva. Then Sugriva, on hearing the news of the loss of Rama, he informs how some time back when he and four of the vanara heroes were sojourning,they saw a demon kidnapping a lady and heard her crying out “Oh, Rama, Oh, Lakshmana” in agony and how on seeing them, she threw down to them her upper cloth and her ornaments. Not only that. He brings that apparel as well as those ornaments and places them in front of Sri Rama. He identified them as belonging to Sita and showing them to Lakshmana asks him – “Are these not hers?” Lakshmana says –</p>
		<p>[My dear brother, I cannot recognize the bangles of sister- in-law. I have not seen them. I have never seen her ear-rings. I can recognize only her anklet, as I was prostrating at her feet every day. I haven’t lifted my head further.]</p>
		<p><strong>Ajatashatru</strong></p>
		<p>A sage by name Gargya went to a king named Ajatashatru and told him “I will teach you the nature of Parabrahmam”. The king said “Alright.” But the king was a man who knew the nature of Brahman – one who was enlightened. Gargya started mentioning the Sun, the Moon, the other luminous bodies, the powers of the great elements etc. One by one. Ajatashatru went on answering that none of them was right in the same technical terminology. Finally Gargya was defeated and he begged Ajatashatru “You yourself teach me.” But he said –</p>
		<p>[This way, when a Brahmin goes to a Kshatriya and says “Let him teach me Brahman” is a contrary method (a topsy turvy approach) I will confess to you what it is by way of reminding you only (not with a felling that I am your Guru). Thus spoke Ajatashatru and held his hands as a friend would and got up to go elsewhere].</p>
		<p>This is the heart of equality.</p>
		<p>“That individual has got the mentality to protect my self- respect as he does his own.” When a man behaves that way, that is acting according to the principle of equality. It is in order to instill such a feeling that the king himself got up and made the Brahmin stand beside him by holding his hand.</p>
		<p>And afterwards Ajatashatru Brahman.</p>
		<p><strong>Gopi</strong></p>
		<p>In order to illustrate that it is possible to learn propriety in speech through poetry, a certain poet has provided an example. Its subject matter is sorrow of separation of a Gopika. Sri Krishna has to leave for another place. He begs her to permit him to leave. Her answer is:</p>
		<p>The poet of this poem is not known. The above thoughts are contained in the “Subhashita Ratnabhandagara” and it is mentioned as from “a man from the South” (Dakshinatya).</p>	
	</section>
</body>
</html>
