<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>samskrt</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-026">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Culture and Nature</h1>
		<p><strong>S</strong>ome twenty or twenty five years ago, B.M. Srikantaiah made a joke. While discussing the adjustment that should exist between old tradition and new literature he provoked the audience to laugh by saying – The wife of a Brahmin is a “Brahminiti”, the wife of an “agasa” or a washerman is an “agasiti” – (These are female gender formations in the Kannada language). Similarly someone might say that the wife of “Samskrita” is “Samskriti” (“Samskrita” is the Sanskrit language and “Samskriti” means “culture”. The word “Samskriti” had come into vogue in Kannada only recently at that time. After that the use of that word has become increasingly frequent. Even the governments have felt that something called culture has value and they are giving it importance. Actually it is correct that it is a valuable thing. But what is this thing called culture?</p>
		<p>Culture is the new name for a certain old thing. It is something that smoothens life. That is its meaning. To cultivate the virtues through which we live our lives with taste and finesse, through which the excesses like sourness and pungency are reduced and the interest in the process of life is increased, cultivation of such qualities is culture. It is a kind of education of the inner self.</p>
		<p>In this life every individual, every moment of his existence has to have a relationship with the world, hasn’t he? What he has to take from it, the good he has to obtain from it will always be there. What he has to give to it to whatever extent will also be there. In this daily commerce of give and take, what is the best way for him to act? To search, to find out and act according to the best interests, to generate, bonhomie, to know what policy is best to be adopted, that practice is culture.</p>
		<p>Then what is best? What is salutary? What is the nature of the good? Shall we say that what we like is best; that is the largest good? The child always wants sweets. Is it good? When we board a train to sit down, if the compartment is full and we feel like throwing a couple of people out, is it good? When we are walking in the street if the flem forms we feel like spitting it out immediately wherever we are. Is it good? Are our likes and dislikes the evidence for deciding what is good? It cannot be; because it is in everybody’s experience that the desires and tastes of people are various. Each man’s mind is his own. Therefore the ever- changing individual and personal experiences of ours cannot be taken as the principal touchstone of what is good. If our standard keeps on changing moment to moment, then it has to be one which can stand firm, unmoving and permanent. The epistemological truth must be contained in the container itself. It must stand by itself – be self-sustaining without the need for any external evidence or proof. If we can obtain a truth that is capable of spacio-temporal transcendence and common to all mankind, we can build our concept of truth on the foundation of its build our concept of truth on the foundation of its beneficial nature and salutariness. Is there such an unchanging, unmoving, eternal entity called truth? This is the fundamental question. In order to find an answer for this, we have to engage ourselves in some metaphysical speculation.</p>
		<p>The human being who keeps on repeating “I”, “I” doesn’t have any doubt about the existence of that principle of Being, does he? An immense power, relating the individual and the world that he sees exists as the substratum for both. Many people have been calling it God from time immemorial. That same entity is also called “Paramatma” or “Parabrahman”. It is that self-same force which is making every living being say “I”, “I” and creating a connection between that and the world. All the comforts and happiness that are desired by man are but the vapours and drops of that ocean. The highest good, the greatest and ultimate goal of man is to be integrated into and become a part of that mighty ocean unlimited in its bliss. The intimate proximity of the individual soul and the absolute Self is the greatest auspiciousness. It is the ultimate goal. That code of conduct conducive to that state is good to that extent, that object which proves convenient to attain that is good to that extent, that is Dharma or right. That object or behaviour which is an impediment to this realization is bad to that extent. It is Adharma or wrong. Thus the concept or action of a man as related to the attainment of the proximity to God lies the goodness or evil. Dharma is that which determines worldly priorities from the point of view of the Realization of the absolute Self. An allotropic form of that Dharma is culture. Culture is the Dharma that has taken shape in the form of worldly contact.</p>
		<p>Man, when he rises above innate nature is culture. The large hill at Sravanabelagola is nature; the statue of Gomateshwara on top of it is culture. The river Kaveri is nature; the paddy fields on its banks is culture. The cooked rice and sweet porridge is culture. Hair is nature; hair-styles of various kinds is culture. Cotton is nature; the sari and the dhoti are culture. Shouting is nature; singing is culture. Idle bellowing is nature; literature and drama is culture. When a child passes urine in bed, it is nature; when it comes out to do it is culture. If a man stays just as he was born, it is nature; with education and civilization he becomes cultured. Thus when human discrimination blends with nature, it is culture.</p>
		<p>When someone points out some shortcoming of crookedness in our speech or behaviour, we are displeased and say “that’s our congenital nature. What can we do about it?” We argue as if just as we cannot change the colour of our body or our size, we cannot change our mind and minister to its quirks and contours. That argument cannot be sustained by reason or logic. Just as there are remedies to cure bodily illness, there are also medicines which can set right and cleanse mental and intellectual defects. That is culture. The important thing is that it can be achieved through human effort.</p>
		<p>Nature is self-existent – has come into being by itself. That is “natural” or creation. It has happened by itself or come out or emanated from itself. Earth, Air, Fire-Brightness, Water and Sky these five elements are Nature. Their consequences and transformations are also Nature. The birth and death of various animals is also Nature. Their bodies and organs are also nature. Thus the entire visible world of ours in our experience and each and every object in it and their functions, are all nature. When man reacts to this world mass satisfactorily with his intellect, it becomes culture.</p>
		<p>Then, is Man a part of nature? Is not his intellect just an aspect of that same Nature? What does it mean when it is said that he should use satisfactorily and creatively? If man’s mind is only an infinitesimal atom of the vast mountain of nature, is it possible for the atom to be superior to the enormity? Is it possible to raise the mountains and lift it with the tiny atom? Unless we cogitate on these questions, the true nature of culture cannot be mentally construed.</p>
		<p>It is true that Man is a child of Nature, but a special sort of child. As Mathew Arnold has said-</p>
		<p class="myquote">Man hath all which Nature hath, but more,<br /> And in that more lie all his hopes of good.<br />Man must begin (know this) when Nature ends;<br />Nature and Man can never be fast friends<br /> Fool, if thou canst not pass her, rest her slave.</p>
		<p>The uniqueness of Man is his creative intellect. In every thing being of the world, two things are visible, aren’t they? One is the body. The other is the life. The body is Nature. What is known as “life” is the inner activity, consciousness, not inert. The basic substance of that active entity is the self which transcends Nature. Nature takes on different forms and keeps on putting on various forms. The Self is not subject to change and remains for ever in the same state. This inner self is the essence of “life”.</p>
		<p>The knowledge of that inner self is the uniqueness of the special creation – Man. The other animals don’t have the remembrance of the soul-stuff. Nature should have hidden the knowledge of the self in non-human animals. Even in man – Mother Nature – she would have left only a small proportion and room for self-knowledge. She would have covered up his eye – the inner eye – with a veil for twenty three hours, six days a week. A brave man who turns inwards to explore his real Self once a week for the remaining one hour may be one in a thousand!</p>
		<p>There is a blend of three qualities (Gunas) in Nature: (1) Sattva (2) Rajas (3) Tamas. (Works like the Bhagavadgita and Manu Smriti explain their qualities). Though all these three qualities are blended in the nature of every human being, among them each quality takes precedence over others in each individual and sometimes different qualities manifest themselves at different times in the same individual. When the “Sattvik” nature becomes predominant, man’s mind turns in the direction of the inner self. That is the auspicious moment. The same thing is Dharma. Dharma is that which is holding together and bearing everything. That which is the support and foundation for the living and the world – that which is wearing and bearing the self that is Dharma, which means the supreme, ultimate, absolute reality or God. Thus, that kind of living which follows the remembrance of Parameswara, the Supreme Lord is Dharma. That is Dharma which makes a man turn towards the self instead of moving away from its Realization.</p>
		<p>It is not possible for the occurrence of “Sattva” never to happen ever in the life-span of any man some day, some moment. On account of some event in the world, in every human being there will arise the “sattva” quality in every man. That very moment is his moment of realization. If he wakes up to it then, he will know the path of good. When once he realizes the true nature what is good, it will be easy for him to distinguish between priorities of values. For one who has come to know the steps of values, determining the moral foundations is not difficult.</p>
		<p>The means by which we know he differences between what the relative importance of things are, is the intellect. When “Sattva” springs forth what he has to be careful about is in matters of mind. The function of the mind is to determine through its intellectual function what is proper and what is improper. When it happens as a result of the thinking mind, it becomes the light of life’s progress.</p>
		<p>The intellect is like a bridge connecting the external world and the inner self. It is a rope bridge. The hands that tug at them are the states of Rajas and Tamas. When “sattva” pulls it, the mind turns in the direction of the self and it acts as a corrective to the involvement with the world. That is culture. When Rajas and Tamas pull at it, the intellect turns towards the world and becomes a slave to the emotion of love, hatred and illusion. That is nature.</p>
		<p>The individual free – will consists of making the mind stay put in “sattva” and preventing it from succumbing to Rajas and Tamas. If man doesn’t have that free-will, he may lose his capacity for personal responsibility in his actions. If all events in life are controlled by nature, if everything is pre-determined and man is not born free, if his own willed actions have no scope, then he cannot be subject to “Punya” (spiritual merit) and “Papa” (sin). Burdening a man who is not “free” with the fruits of actions is not just. Nature herself would have located personal freedom within man himself. That is why he has the responsibility of Papa and Punya. That is why it is inevitable for him to accept the fruits of his action.</p>
		<p>When the intellect performs its function with inner sanction, man’s attitude to the world gets transformed in two ways – (1) Behaving towards others as he would behave towards himself, he is himself the measure for others. (2) The discrimination of what is more wealthy and what is less so.</p>
		<ol>
			<li>He becomes capable of recognizing that the same life- force that is within him is what is within all living beings and the others are really oneself.</li>
			<li>He will be constantly correcting himself by observing the high and the low in the world and the desires and intentions of his will be subject to the critical examination of his discriminatory weapon. In his achievement of the goals of life – especially the well known four fold-objects, in the case of the first three, namely, Dharma, Artha and Kama he will have an order of fixed priorities to attain Moksha.</li>
		</ol>
		<p class="text-right">-Apasthamba Dharmasutra II, 8, 20, 17-23.</p>
		<p>[Engaging oneself in earning money in a way in which it is not detrimental to the path of Dharma, spending it in helping the deserving and in philanthropic acts, earning the good-will of the people, enjoying the pleasures of life which are not contrary to the injunctions of Dharma – a man who engages himself thus will win acclaim in both the worlds.]</p>
		<p class="text-right">-Mahabharata Udyogaparva. 124-38.</p>
		<p>[A man who wants happiness and money must act according to Dharma. Money and happiness are not apart from Dharma. Therefore for the benefit of all three, Dharma is the means.]</p>
		<p class="text-right">-Mahabharata. Shantiparva. 197-8, 6</p>
		<p>[of the Gunas, Dharma is the highest; earning money is the middle one; the lowest is the fulfillment of desires. A man who is dedicated to the Self must thus act according to putting Dharma first: he has to behave towards all living beings in the same way as he does with himself.]</p>
		<p>In the case of a person who acts according to the principle “Atmavat Sarvabhuteshu” (seeing all beings as oneself) the qualities that bring peace of mind such as compassion towards all living things in daily life, generosity, fraternal feeling, kindness, eschewing of cruelty, not behaving with highhandedness, politeness, pleasantness, humility – these qualities are the natural by-products. He experiences pain in the pain of others. He guesses their state of mind and with conscious effort he pushes away the sort of talk which might trouble them. Extending friendliness and gaiety becomes his very nature.</p>
		<p>For a man who has seen the richness and objects of enjoyment of the world with the vantage point of the supremacy of the Self and has learnt their limits and uses, indifference towards many worldly things becomes easy. He is more ready for self-sacrifice. The fiend of covetousness cannot capture him. Excessive possessiveness and attachment to worldly objects cannot come near him. The possibility of this clashing with others is very rare. He searches for a way of reconciliation in a situation of the quarrel. This way also he becomes dear to the world.</p>
		<p>Culture is that propriety resulting in a behaviour moulded by a policy of treating others as oneself and the priorities of wealth determined by discrimination. For dozens of complex questions like what is just in which situation; which is etiquette; who deserves respect; in whose case one should show displeasure; what is the extent of that expression; what sort of words should be employed in such a situation; where is silence called for; what sort of tone should be adopted while speaking; what gestures are to be used – for all such questions, the cultured man finds answers in no time at all. The sense of propriety comes to him automatically, quite naturally like breath to the nose. His limbs and mouth, like the mind and the intellect behind them are always under his control. It is this control of the senses which is self- control; it means keeping himself under all control. He is the truly cultured man in whose internal machinery the nuts and bolts are ship-shape and smoothly oiled. His knowledge of proprieties and priorities is the mark of culture.</p>
		<p>For these various qualities of culture to develop and strengthen, a long-time effort and practice are necessary. Can the congenital quirks and dirt be discarded like removing the apparel? It is only by adhering for long and steadily – it is only by “tapas” (concentrated meditation) that it is possible. That achievement of the principle cannot be completed only through conscious intellect. The whole mind should co-operate with it: The mind is more potent than mere intellect in its effect. The intellect works by fits and starts. But the mind is always active within us. Desire, pride, anger, vanity, envy, sorrow – all such aberrations are generated by the mind. Therefore the man desirous of culture should first of all clean up the mind or cultivating fine art and the company of cultivated people. That is the reason why usually, people believe that culture means music and literature, myths and legends. In actual fact, poetry, music, dancing and painting are not the entire body of culture; they are only some parts of it. The inner transformation effected by those form the necessary pre-requisites for culture.</p>
		<p>Man’s mind gets purified by the great influence of the works of art. It acquires finesse as well as nobility. It will be composed of a feeling of general good for the world. Ramayana and the Mahabharata bring us experiences of life not easily available; As a result of this our inner vision gets refined; our area of interest gets enlarged. The goal of life gets ennobled. This maturity of life – awareness is the ultimate use of good literature. Similarly, the company of good people brings us great experiences and extremely sophisticated ones too. Thus the man who has refined himself by the study of art, by contact with society, by good company and by realizing the universality of the Self – such is the man exemplifying what the Bhagawadgita describes.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
