<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>saṃskṛti</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-027">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Culture</h1>
		<p><strong>I</strong>f an object in nature is beautified by the discrimination of man, it is culture.</p>
		<p>The forest paddy is nature. The fine variety of grain of Pattisomana halli is culture. Paddy is nature; Rice is culture. Rice is nature: the cooked and refined sweet and sour variety of it is culture. A boulder is nature; the dressed stone in one’s courtyard is culture; the marble is nature, the statue carved out of it by a sculptor is culture. A lump of lumber is nature; table and chair are culture. The sounds produced by animals and birds is nature. Recognizing their melodic and tonal variations arranging them and organizing them into various ragas (the up and down scales of tones) is culture.</p>
		<p>It seems the main characteristics of the seven swaras (the octave), Sa, Ri, Ga, Ma, Pa, Dha, Ni – are as follows:</p>
		<p class="text-right">-Amarakosha 1.8</p>
		<p>[The utterance of a peacock is “Shadja”, that of a bull is “Rishabha”; that of a goat is “Gandhara” that of the Krauncha bird is “Madhyama”; that of the Cuckoo, the Indian koel is “Panchama”; that of the horse is “Dhaivata”; that of the elephant is “Nishada”.]</p>
		<p>The words we talk and hear are nature – “Prakriti”; the same words arranged according to a meaningful pattern is culture – “Samskriti”. The urge to talk is nature. The limits and good manners in that are culture. Making water and relieving, this is nature. The donkey and the ox do not discriminate where they do it. The babies in the cradle don’t discriminate either. As the child grows it gets the sense of place and time. That is culture. That which happens consciously over and above what happens naturally is culture; if something stays the same as it was at its birth, it is nature, civilization is culture. It is nature when different kinds of flowers and leaves in a variety of colours shine forth. When they are gathered and made into a garland or a bouquet, it is culture. Mother Nature provides us with the raw materials for our livelihood. We use it in a proper context to yield meaning to our lives. That is culture. To convert a forest into a garden is culture. To comb it neatly, weave it into an artistic braid and decorate it with flowers is culture. That which has come into existence by itself is nature. When man tames into an intellectual order is culture. The various kinds of hungers of our body are nature. The orderly and meaningful way these are appeared according to the proper time, place and manner is culture.</p>
		<p>Culture is not confined merely to a pleasing appearance and beautiful speech. That is external culture. Superior to that is inner, innate culture. Desires and emotional involvements are nature. A sense of justice and discrimination is culture. Anger and envy are nature; forgiveness and tolerance are culture. Thus in matters of mind, body speech, there is room for culture. Culture reaches its pinnacle in the mind’s nobility. When there is nobility in the mind, when there is beauty there – that nobility and beauty finds its external manifestation in our voice, speech, facial expression and courtesy in our behaviour.</p>
		<p>Then two things happen:</p>
		<p>Firstly, happiness takes place in the hearts of those with whom we are dealing with. They become pleased and turn out to be our allies.</p>
		<p>Secondly if they have any narrow mindedness and ulterior motive, it comes down and they will also be capable of getting a glimpse or our superior ideal.</p>
		<p>Thus there is a two-fold advantage. When culture enters into a mutual life-relationship, it brings friendship and happiness on both sides. In this programme, two things will have to take place:</p>
		<p>First – Acquaintance with another’s nature. Second – Education of one’s own nature.</p>
		<p>We will have to learn to the maximum extent possible the workings of another person’s mind and temperament and character. And, we have to make an adjustment to their mentality our own attitude to life. Thus the process of an individual making a friendly adjustment and correcting oneself suitably many be called culture.</p>
		<p><strong>The Story of the Cow</strong></p>
		<p>Well, what does one person adjusting himself to another exactly mean? In our story of the cow, does the cow adjust itself to the wishes of the tiger? Or, does the tiger become obedient to Punyakoti the cow? A tiger catching hold of a cow and eating it is natural, that is nature. The tiger admiring of truthfulness of the cow is culture. The cow confessing about the calf is culture. The tiger responding and showing sympathy is a cultural response. The culture residing in the cow became the cause for the culture in the tiger.</p>
		<p>It has already been suggested that when culture reaches its summit, it becomes the principle for the establishment of a relationship between two lives. What is “life”? It is the combination of two objects; one part of it is the conglomorations of the body and the sense organs; the other is the self or the soul. The sense organ desires the comforts of the world; the soul hankers after a consciousness higher than itself. Culture has got both these aspects in view; Worldly comfort and elevation of the soul.</p>
		<p>There is a common feeling among men that both these are mutually opposed to each other. It is the conceptual belief of culture that they are not opposed to each other but are complementary and helpful. They are like two steps; it is not possible to ascend the second step without ascending the first. The first step was useless unless the second was ascended. There is a place for both steps in a man’s life. When once it is accepted that in an animal called man the most paramount thing is an element called Self, it becomes proper for all other aspects of life the basics of the substratum for the attainment of that Supreme Goal. There are a thousand things we want in life. Among them there are some which are of lasting value, and some which are momentary enjoyment. Each one of them has its own proper place. It has its value in that specific place. In other places, it appears undesirable. The delicious sweet rice, instead of falling into the mouth falls on the thigh or lap it is disgusting. In keeping with this, there is a saying in English. A thing out of its place is dirt. That object which leaves its own deserved place and places itself in another is dirt. This same principle can be applied to administrative matters also. A police constable can arrest a guilty person and present him before a magistrate. That is his duty. But if he exceeds his jurisdictory duty and conducts a trial himself and awards a sentence, then it is dirt. Similarly if a magistrate himself sets out to arrest a culprit, then it is dirt. To search for and bring an outlaw to justice is a policeman’s duty, not the magistrate’s. Thus each position or office has its own limits. Knowing these limits and giving each thing the value it deserves is justice. Justice itself is culture.</p>
		<p>Thus assigning each object in the world its proper place is the job of culture. Determing the importance of each place is also the province of culture. All in all, the propriety of our actions itself is culture. There are two principles to this propriety –</p>
		<P>(1) The Self I supreme. Therefore it deserves universal respect; (2) Because the Self is found in everyone as it is found in me and in the same way, I must value the sorrow and joys of others the same way as I value them in me. Thus if I owe a duty and responsibility to others, along with it, it becomes incumbent on my part to know their feelings and desires. Thus knowing what others feel becomes a part of culture. First the knowledge of their expectations; then propriety of behaviour as a consequence of it.</p>
		<p>Of the various aspects of man, isn’t the self the highest? The Self is the same in everybody. Therefore superiority and inferiority don’t exist in the matter of the supreme Self. But worldly things are not like that. There, depending on the differences in their intelligence and mind, the values of things change. For one man eating is important; for another, looks. One man prefers a round face; another an oval one; one man likes sweets; another hot and pungent stuff. One lady prefers jasmine; another champak. One woman likes apparel; another music. One man gets angry soon and also forgets it soon. Another man takes a long time to get angry and doesn’t forget it even after twelve years. One man is trusting and doesn’t think for himself. Another cannot trust anyone and he thinks too much. Thus in mankind, there are dozens of varieties of mentalities, intellectual abilities and moral outlooks and these are found in various levels. A cultured man understands these levels and adjusts his talk and behaviour to the situation on hand. No matter what the circumstance, his endeavour is for creating wellbeing.</p>
		<p>Here we must notice that what is good is different from what brings happiness. There are moments when they both get together, there are moments when they stand apart. For a drunkard drinking brings happiness, it is not good. For a sick child sweets bring happiness, but not good. For a sick manmedicine is good but it does not bring happiness. For an uneducated boy freedom is happiness but it is not good.</p>
		<p>For a sick man honey is good as well as cause for happiness. For a good student a time schedule is good as well as beneficial.</p>
		<p>Happiness satisfies the senses first. After cogitation whether it is good or bad is known to the intellect. What is beneficial is first cognized by the mind. Afterwards, even if the experience does not bring happiness to the mind, we receive it willingly. A beautiful girl who loves to decorate herself with ornaments suffers the pain of getting her ears pierced receives it as desirable. Such is the nature of what is good. That which is received by the thoughtful discrimination is good. That is good which is approved by the self as such. That comfort which does not impede personal good is happiness.</p>
		<p>The means and the case which shows us with example the various modes of understanding others’ minds and that which makes clear to our minds the sophisticated emotions in literature like poetry and drama, that which educates our intellect – this role is performed by the fine arts like music, stage presentation through acting, sculpture and painting. Thus the literary arts are the feeding elements for culture. In the Ramayana and the Mahabharata we can see plenty of examples of cultured behaviour.</p>
		<p>(1) When Sri Ramachandra and Lakshmana armed themselves with bows, arrows and swords and started to go to the forest, Sitadevi addressed her husband thus “My lord, when fighting weapons are in one’s arms, they are capable of engendering a cruel frame of mind, there is the fear that innocent people might come to harm form you”. After giving this warning and after mentioning an incident in such a circumstance, she adds at the end: “Lord, I have not spoken to teach you something you don’t know; the love and respect I have for you have made me remind you of your own opinion”.</p>
		<p>Sita spoke Dharma. To whom? To the very personification of all Dharma Therefore, in addition to packing the thoughts of Dharma, she imparted humble politeness. This is propriety.</p>
		<p>(2) At the Kurukshetra the armies of the Pandavas and the Kauravas are gathered ready for battle. When everyone was in the middle of that enthusiastic expectancy, Dharmaraya got off from his chariot and walked barefoot towards the enemy camp. His brothers and friends mistakenly thought that out of fear he was walking across to surrender and tried to prevent him. What did he do? He went to Acharya Bhishma and said –</p>
		<p>Yudhishtira held both the feet of Bhishmacharya and said “Sir, nobody can vanquish you. We have come to wage war with you. For that purpose, I have approached you to beg you. Please give us permission; Please bless us.”</p>
		<p>This is the way of culture. Bhishma, after making it clear to Dharmaraya that it would have been wrong had he not done so, blessed him.</p>
		<p>It is said that culture is one of those inexplicable things containing the wealth of thought, speech and action, all combined, though it is beyond description, it is not beyond cognition. Everybody is able to recognize it the moment they come across it as a special attraction. The path of culture is not fraught with roughness and obstinacy; it is a path of smoothness and politeness. What is the difference between a life without grace and finesse and that of dog which rushes forward to grab the leftovers?</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
