<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Life Sutras</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000c">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Introduction</h1>
		<p>Life is a gift. This gift should be celebrated. During the course of life, we encounter various experiences, both good and bad. What is necessary is to meet all experiences with equanimity. This is easier said than done, but not impossible to achieve. Normally, age and experience of life mellow people down to acceptance. It is but natural for the youth to react quickly to everything. </p>
		<p>Today, the pace of life has become faster than earlier, thanks to the growth in technology and globalization. With challenges changing every second, there is very little time on the hands of today’s youth to pause and reflect. As a result, even little disappointments are met with violent reactions. Sometimes, even the slightest provocation leads them to the extreme step of taking their own life or that of others.</p>
		<p>Increasing number of nuclear families and absence of community activities drive the youth into their cocoons. In consequence their pent-up emotions do not find adequate outlets and are bottled up. This may result in depression. The prevalence of depressive disorders in India, as per a study conducted in 12 states by NIMHANS, Bengaluru in 2016, is estimated to be 2.7 percent of the total population. In this context there is an urgent need to equip the youth with life skills and instil confidence.<strong><em> Life Sutras</em></strong> is an attempt in this direction. It offers help not from an expert psychologist point of view, but with simple discussion of problems by concerned, informed individuals.</p>
		<p>Narrating stories has proved from time immemorial as a very effective way of teaching. <strong><em>Life Sutras</em></strong> is a sequel to the book <strong><em>Skill Sutras</em></strong>. <strong><em>Skill Sutras</em></strong> used stories from Indian mythologies and legends to illustrate various skills in communication that the youth would like to learn. The lessons unravel themselves in a series of conversations between the aunt Nandita and Raju the nephew. The seeds of confidence and purposefulness sown by his aunt seem to have borne fruit and Raju has now grown into a sensitive and sensible young man. As he reaches his final year of engineering studies, Raju has grown into a responsible individual with a positive attitude of giving back to the institute which has nurtured him. He has now a group of like-minded friends who have taken charge of helping their juniors with the necessary life skills. They have found a unique way of giving back to their alma mater, of course, with strong support and guidance of aunt Nandita. Life skills essential for youth are illustrated by stories, discussions and comments built around them. These discussions are reflections of the author of the book as well as the various interactions she has had with a number of people she has come across over a period of time. Hence, they mirror life.</p>
		<p>Managing life is learnt largely through experience. Experience is often shared in the form of stories and anecdotes. Reading these in turn can teach lessons of life to the youngsters who haven’t had a chance to experience life fully. When they encounter similar situations, these stories may come in handy in facing the challenges<strong>.</strong></p>
		<p>Each individual’s life is unique in its own way. When we look at a beggar fast asleep on the traffic island oblivious of the mad rush of vehicles and people all around him, it makes us reflect on the futility of the rat race which steals good sleep from us. But when we encounter a triumphant youngster with stars in his eyes and a glow on his face narrating his achievements, we feel, after all to strive, to struggle to achieve our dreams is worth all the strife.</p>
		<p>The perceptions and dreams of each person are different from that of others. All of us accept and carry on with our lives as it is given to us. We try to create our own space within the framework of that life. We perceive life and people around us from our own point of view. Later, sometime in life we encounter moments of truth. Such a moment of truth descended on the great legendary poet Bharavi, which made him realize the value of his father’s silence about him. The king in another story understood the worth of the seemingly insignificant matchstick in brightening up the temple. Each story in this volume gives us lessons of life. The conversations and comments woven around the stories may provide answers to some of the questions that have been bothering us.</p>
		<p><strong><em>Life Sutras</em></strong> has a wider canvas than <strong><em>Skill Sutras</em></strong>. The stories that appear in this volume, apart from a couple of them written by the author of this book, are gathered from various sources like the internet, magazines and stories in circulation in the oral tradition and have originated in different countries and cultures. Different versions of the same stories may be in circulation like the story of <em>Hans, the brave boy of Holland</em>. Sometimes the stories are attributed to someone other than what might have appeared in one source. The authorship of almost all the stories is not known. However, wherever possible, references have been cited. As Tal Ben Shahar, the positive psychologist said, the best self-help books are solid biographies, books that show you the real deals, ups and downs of life and show what gives the strength to meet challenges. So, some of the stories are taken from the biographies and autobiographies of great people. All the stories are taken for illustrative purpose only. The stories, depending on the strong message they deliver, appear in different chapters following specific themes. However, they can be attributed to other life sutras as well, because the sutras are not independent of each other that can be placed in water-tight compartments. For example, a story illustrating interpersonal relationship is certainly marked by the attitude of the person towards others. Similarly, the episode from Abraham Lincoln’s life cited in the chapter on positive attitude can also stand for confidence and self- esteem. Life, after all is a continuous flow. So, it can be said that the sutras feed into each other.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
