<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Life Sutras</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Life Sutras</h1>
		<p>Raju has every reason today to be pleased with himself. He is in the final semester of his engineering studies. He has already been offered a job in a reputed company in the campus placement programme conducted in the previous semester.</p>
		<p>However, towards the end of the previous semester he felt very sad. When he went to college that day he was in for a shock. One student in the third year had committed suicide. He had scored badly in the semester exams and didn’t have the courage to face his parents and had taken the extreme step. It was a very unfortunate day in the history of the institution which prided itself in completely wiping out many negative practices, even ragging, among students.</p>
		<p>After that incident Raju felt very restless and became conscious of the news items published in the dailies. Almost every day there was news about some youth or the other taking his or her life. Failure in love, failure in exams, failure to get a job, even a trivial cause like failure to convince the parents to buy a mobile phone could drive someone to take one’s own life! </p>
		<p>‘Why don’t these people remember what Dr. Abdul Kalam said about failure? What a beautiful expansion of the word he gave! FAIL - <strong>F</strong>irst <strong>A</strong>ttempt <strong>I</strong>n <strong>L</strong>earning’. ‘How lucky I am to have an aunt like Nandita!’ thought Raju. She stood by him like a rock and pulled him out of his low self-esteem. She guided him through a difficult period in life when he lacked self-confidence. She filled him with positive attitude towards life. Today, no doubt, he radiated a lot of positive energy.</p>
		<p>Raju folded the newspaper and got up with determination to give back to the youth what he got from his aunt and teachers. He telephoned a few of his friends and asked them to come to the canteen at 10 o’clock. When they met, he shared with them his action plan. Ashish, Amina, Swapna, Tejas, Hemant and Anjali liked his plan and agreed to form a group. They planned to continue the strategy Nandita had used to pull Raju out of a situation when he almost gave up on his abilities to continue his studies. They wanted their friends to be given inputs which might help them develop positive attitude to life and meet adversaries with strength of mind.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>Raju spoke to his aunt, the mentor, about his plans. Nandita appreciated his initiative and advised him and his friends about the course of action.</p>
		<p>‘There is something called ‘<strong><em>life skills</em></strong>’ which all of us should learn. Life skills include developing self-esteem, positive attitudes towards life, time-management, anger management, disaster management and so on’. She gave a complete list to him and asked him to work on an action plan. Raju got her word that she would help the group in their work from time to time. </p>
		<p>The plan was that every Sunday Nandita would explain one concept of each of these topics to him and his friends. They should look for stories that represent these concepts. They would read these stories to the group on the following Saturday and after getting the group’s approval the stories would be posted on the special notice board in the college. Raju would get approval from his Principal to put up the notice board in a strategic place in the college.</p>
		<p>Each of them agreed to rummage through books, internet, magazines and all other sources for stories that would give direction to young minds.</p>
		<p>Tejas said, ‘Let’s meet every weekend. We should assign ourselves particular days to bring the stories which impress us. Each story will be read out to others. We can then discuss what positive message can be elucidated from it’.</p>
		<p>‘Good. Sunday, we understand the concept and the following Saturday is for sharing the stories. We may even start a blog group’. Raju said.</p>
		<p>‘What should we call our group?’ Amina wondered.</p>
		<p>‘Hmm .... let us think of an apt name for the group’. Raju looked at all of them. </p>
		<p>‘Idea... Raju, Ashish, Amina, Swapna, Tejas, Hemant and Anjali.... RAASTHA...the Path... the right path...’. Swapna came up with the name.</p>
		<p>All of them agreed to the name immediately. Then they drew up an action plan for the next twelve weeks.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>Nandita gave Raju the following list of the various aspects to be taken care of to understand <strong><em>life skills</em></strong><strong>.</strong></p>
		<ol>
			<li>Building self-esteem</li>
			<li>Positive attitude, taking a perspective</li>
			<li>Management of emotions and self-control</li>
			<li>Goal setting and taking on challenges</li>
			<li>Stress management </li>
			<li>Time management</li>
			<li>Interpersonal skills</li>
			<li>Disaster management</li>
			<li>Developing critical thinking and creativity</li>
			<li>Problem solving and decision making</li>
			<li>Developing assertiveness</li>
			<li>Team spirit and leadership</li>
		</ol>
		<p>She also told him that every Sunday she would take up one topic and explain the concept to them. They could then look for suitable anecdotes, episodes and stories to illustrate that particular aspect of life. </p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
