<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Life Sutras</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Reflectors, Relationships and Reflection</h1>
		<p>My parents and siblings, friends and colleagues, my husband, son and daughter- in-law, and little Smera who came into this world while this book was in the making; my students, friends and all others I have interacted with have held up mirrors to me to have a peep at myself, to realize that what others think of you may not be the same as what you think of yourself. And you have no control over what others think of you. They have acted as the hour hand and minute hand of the clock of my life and added meaning to it. Each relationship gave new meaning to my life, scope to reflect, regret and correct myself. I owe this analogy of the clock to my son who used it in one of our long conversations. I have used many of the little stories friends sent me on WhatsApp, and am grateful. Anupam Arunachalam, with his insightful illustrations has added value to the book. Pranesh, Ravindranath, Chaya, Lakshmi and the entire team of Prism Publications have made it possible for <em>Life Sutras</em> see the light of the day. Now you have <em>Life Sutras</em> with you...</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
