<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Powerful Dialogues</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Preface</h1>
		<p class="myquote">Art is a way to express life. Science is a way to explain life. When they come together, It is a beautiful communion.</p>
		<p>This book was not ‘written’; but it evolved through a gradual and organic process. </p>
		<p>A mentee, who likes to call me his Divine Sister, planted the idea of writing a book in my mind. He said that I must consider writing a book because my words have ‘transformational power’. The idea germinated when I started reflecting on the one question that has always intrigued me as a clinical psychologist, mentor and trainer: What is the dynamics of change in human behaviour? </p>
		<p>As life unfolded in its many facets through my interactions with people from various walks of life, the beauty of science, neuroscience, psychology and the art of communication gave me insights into human behaviour that I had never experienced otherwise.</p>
		<p>I have always been fascinated by how seemingly ordinary words sometimes have profound impact and initiate change in human thought and behaviour. This fascination, which is the driving force behind Powerful Dialogues, steered me to one of the most potent tools in change dynamics: The role of DIALOGUES. This book is an attempt to trace the transformation engendered by dialogue in a context. It chronicles the experiential journey of a few people whose lives significantly changed because of a dialogue.</p>
		<p>My quest led me to my past and the past of many others whose lives have been transformed. I revisited my own life experiences to discover that dialogues had indeed played a significant role in initiating change in my personal and professional life leading me to make decisions that have defined me as a person and a professional.</p>
		<p>I interviewed several people - mentees, clients, trainees - to discover if my words had had an impact on them, and if indeed they had, how the words impacted them and what actionable objective they had accomplished as a result of those words. </p>
		<p>I applied the same strategy to my own experiences. I summoned up a series of dialogues I have had with people over the years; dialogues I have had with myself; dialogues made by others that have impacted my life; and my own words that have affected others’ lives. </p>
		<p>At this point, Shubha Srikanth came on board as an editor. However very quickly she transformed into being a facilitator of the content, brainstorming, asking critical questions, giving the content a narrative style close to my personal style.</p>
		<p>My quest culminated in this book. The book is not merely a compilation of powerful dialogues, but it traces the process involved in behavioural change as triggered by these powerful dialogues.</p>
		<p>Dialogues stir an activity within us- a subtle momentary realization that has the power to give a fresh insight or bring forth a suppressed experience. It is like finding the right key to the lock.</p>
		<p>From this superstructure of experiences, the thematic framework of the book emerged. The dialogues that I had compiled fell into one or more of the following five themes as experienced by the receiver (mentee, trainee, counselee): EMPATHY, CLARITY, CHALLENGE, DEFINING SELF AND TRUST. The book traces how dialogues expressing each of these human experiences initiated change in the receiver. All the experiences narrated in the book are real -life experiences of people I have interacted with personally. <sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-000d.01">*</a></sup></p>
		<p>The narrative of the book is experiential in nature and non -prescriptive in content. It  is neither a self -help book nor a technical handbook. Unlike most books that talk about change dynamics in the context of an organization, Powerful Dialogues is highly individual-centric and uses self-reflection as a primary tool for transformation.</p>
		<p class="quote-author">Shobha Managoli</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
