<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>Nagpur Ashram</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body>
<HR>
<ul>
<li>
<A>Suryanamaskara_Plates_1-2
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Suryanamaskara_Plates_3-5_Latest
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Suryanamaskara_Plates_6-9_Latest
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Suryanamaskara_Plates_10-14_Latest
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Suryanamaskara_Plates_15-16_Latest
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Suryanamaskara_Plate_17_Latest
</A>
</li>
</ul>
</HR>
<p>Surya Namaskara – <em>with</em> Pranayama, Mudras & Bandha and Accupressure</p>
<p>1</p>
<p>PB</p>
<p>Surya Namaskara</p>
<p>Surya Namaskara is for the body, mind and soul. Every morning at sunrise, doing Surya Namaskara facing the East is believed to bestow - good health, long life, increased energy level (<em>Prana Shakti</em>) or stamina, glow to the face, improved eye sight and a personality that is radiant and effulgent like the sun.</p>
<p>It is also believed that there will not be any dearth in the practitioner's life.</p>
<p>
<strong>Surya Namaskara</strong>
</p>
<p>Everyone has immense energy within which only a few are able to tap into, while in the larger majority it remains dormant as coiled up energy or potential energy. Surya Namaskara is one of techniques for awakening the coiled up energy or kundalini Shakti. Surya Namaskara helps in converting the potential energy to kinetic energy.</p>
<p>The scriptures says that <em>sharira madyam khalu dharma sadhanam </em><span>(शरीरमाद्यं खलु धर्मसाधनम्)</span> – through the healthy body alone one can do sadhana. Here the health refers to health of both the body and the mind. The same thing is told in Upanishad <em>as Mana eva </em><em>manushyanam karanam bandha mokshayoho – </em><span>(मन एव मनुष्याणां कारणं </span>बन्धमोक्षयोः), “as the mind, so the man; bondage or liberation are in your own mind.” Having a healthy body without a healthy mind is of no use. It is true the other way also, having a healthy mind and a weak body is also of no use. Doing Surya Namaskara regularly helps in converting slothful body and drowsy mind to dynamic body and alert mind. Surya Namaskara is the source of health for the body, mind and the soul. This is mentioned in the scripture as</p>
<p>
<em>Arogyam bhaskara:d ichche:th</em>
<em/>
<em>Sriyam ichche:th utha:sana:th</em>
</p>
<p>
<em>sankara:th jna:na manvichcheth</em>
<em/>
<em>Mo:ksham ichcheth jana:rdana:th</em>
</p>
<p>
<span>आरोग्यं भास्करादिच्छेत् श्रियमिच्छेद् हुताशनात् ।</span>
</p>
<p>
<span>शंकराद् ज्ञानमन्विच्छेत् मोक्षमिच्छेद् जनार्दनात् ।।</span>
</p>
<p>“If you want just health, you have to worship the Lord in the form of Bhaskara (Sun). And if you want just wealth, you need to worship the Lord through the fire. But if you want just knowledge, you have to worship Lord Shiva. But if you want a release from all bondages, you need to worship the Lord in the form of Vishnu.”</p>
<p>Bhaskara means the radiant one. If you think sun is the radiant one you will get only good health. But if you realise the Lord is the most resplendent one who has given the light even to the sun, then that same Surya Namaskara becomes a path of moksha (liberation).</p>
<p>
<strong>Significance of Surya Namaskara (Sun Salutation)</strong>
</p>
<p>The benefits of Surya Namaskara are mentioned in scriptures like Valmiki Ramayan, Mahabharata and other scriptures. Surya Namaskara is a process of invoking the Grace of the Lord through sun. Sun is the most brilliant gross object we all can see. When we see this brilliant sun, we should be reminded of most resplendent Lord who gave this brilliance to the sun. Surya Namaskara signifies the <em>“Path of Light”.</em> The <em>Brihadaranyaka Upanishad</em> summarises the significance of Surya Namaskara as-</p>
<p>
<em>Om Asato Maa Sad-Gamaya</em>
<em/>
<em>Tamaso Maa Jyotir-Gamaya</em>
<em/>
<em>Mrtyor-Maa Amrtam Gamaya -</em>
</p>
<p>
<span>असतो मा सद् गमय । तमसो मा ज्योतिर्गमय । मृत्योर्मा अमृतं गमय ।।</span>
</p>
<p>Lead us from imperfection to Perfection, from darkness to Light, from death to Immortality.</p>
<p>Like Gayatri mantra, Surya Namaskara is also a process of invoking the Lord in the sun. Surya Namaskara is for the body, mind and soul. Every morning at sunrise, doing Surya Namaskara facing the East is believed to bestow - good health, long life, increased energy level (Prana Shakti) or stamina, glow to the face, improved eye sight and a personality that is radiant and effulgent like the sun.</p>
<p>It is also believed that there will not be any dearth in the practitioner's life.</p>
<p>With the regular practice of Surya Namaskara, oxygen content in the blood increases, body immunity improves and the respiratory, digestive, circulatory, nervous, reproductive and excretory systems get strengthened. Surya Namaskara is beneficial for people with blood pressure, diabetes, obesity and depression problems. Above all, it helps in invoking the Grace of the Lord in the Sun who is also in our heart. The same thing is mentioned in Taittiriya Upanishad as <em>Sa yaschayam purushe yaschasavaditye sa ekah</em> - the Lord in this person and Sun God is the same.</p>
<p>The sun enlivens and sustains the whole world. At dawn birds start singing with joy seeing the sun rise. As the sun sets, all birds go to their nests. We also feel energetic as the sun rises and we feel drained of energy as the sun sets. There is a link between the sun and the energy level in the body. By doing <em>Surya Namaskara</em>, we are linking the <em>prana shakti</em> (energy level) in our body to the <em>prana shakti</em> in the sun. This linking process is <em>Surya Namaskara</em>. There is a <em>prana</em> in the sun, and within the <em>prana</em> the Supreme Lord resides. In our body also, there is a <em>Prana </em>and within this <em>Prana</em> the Supreme Lord resides. The Rig Veda mantra describes the benefits of praying to the Lord in the sun.</p>
<p>In summary, the Vedic mantras say: ‘<em>Give us a healthy body with </em><em>long life so that we can continue our sadhana (practice) for the </em><em>whole life. Let there be no deformity, accidents or untimely death </em><em>for us which curtails our sadhana. May we get a permanent </em><em>body, i.e. liberation, so that there is no pain of repeated birth and </em><em>death.’</em></p>
<p>
<strong>Surya Namaskara Mantras in Various Scriptures</strong>
</p>
<p>Some of the <em>Surya Namaskara</em> mantras within the <em>Vedas</em> and <em>Upanishads</em> are listed here. Think of the meanings of these mantras while doing the <em>Surya Namaskara</em> for maximizing benefits.</p>
<p>
<strong>Soura Sooktam in Rig Veda</strong>
</p>
<p>udyannadya mitramaha ArohannuttarAM divam |</p>
<p>hRudrogaM mama sUrya harimANaM cha nAshaya|| 11 ||</p>
<p><span>उद्यन्नद्य मित्रमहः आरोहन्नुत्तरां दिवम् । हृद्रोगं मम सूर्य हरिमानं च नाशय ।। </span>11 ।।</p>
<p>O friend of the universe, O most resplendent Lord who gives the brilliance even to brilliant things, kindly relieve me of my heart and other physical sickness and mental worries. Bless me with peace.</p>
<p>
<strong>The Surya Upanishad in Atharva Veda</strong>
</p>
<p>ādityāyà vidmahè sahasra-kiranāyà dhīmahi |tannà sūrya prachodayāt |</p>
<p>
<span>आदित्याय विद्महे सहस्रकिरणाय धीमहि । तन्नः सूर्यः प्रचोदयात् ।।</span>
</p>
<p>May we try to know more about the most ancient Person, May we contemplate on the most effulgent Person and May the most brilliant Person illumine both my inner and outer personality.</p>
<p>
<strong>Maha Narayana Upanishad</strong>
</p>
<p>Uddipyasva jatavedo apagna nirittim mamaPashungscha mahya mavaha jeevanam ca disho disha</p>
<p>उद्दीप्यस्व जातवेदोऽपघ्नन् निर्ऋतिं मम ।</p>
<p>पशूँश्च मह्यमाहव जीवनं च दिशो दिश ।।</p>
<p>The knower of all in the rising light, may you dispel all my negativities. May the bliss be dawn in me and may my life be a celebration in all directions.</p>
<p>
<em>Om Bhaskaraya Vidmahe Mahadyutikaraya Dheemahi </em>
<em/>
<em>Tanno Adityah Prachodayat</em>
</p>
<p><strong>ॐ</strong> भास्कराय विद्महे महद्द्युतिकराय धीमहि । तन्नो आदित्यः प्रचोदयात् ।।</p>
<p>May we know about all resplendent one, may we contemplate on the most brilliant one and may the most ancient one illumine our consciousness.</p>
<p>
<strong>Katopanishad/Mundakopanishad/Shwetaswatara Upanishad</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em>Om Na Tatra suryo Bhati Na Chandra tarakam</em>
<em/>
<em>Ne ma vidyato bhanti kutoyo agnihi </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>Tameva bhantam anubhati sarvam</em>
<em/>
<em>tasya bhasa sarvam idam vibhati</em>
</p>
<p><strong>ॐ</strong><span> न तत्र सूर्यो भाति न चन्द्रतारकं नेमा विद्यतो भान्ति कु</span>तोऽयमग्निः ।</p>
<p>तमेव भान्तमनुभाति सर्वं तस्य भासा सर्वमिदं विभाति ।।</p>
<p>The state of realization, <em>moksha,</em> described in this mantra is, ‘where the sun does not shine, nor the moon nor the stars, nor lightening shines. How then can this earthly fire illumine the Self? Verily everything shines by Him reflecting His glory. This whole world is illumined with His Light’</p>
<p>"</p>
<p>
<strong>SURYA NAMASKARA</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em>with</em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Pranayama, Mudras & Bandha and Accupressure</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Rajendra Damodara Yenkannamoole</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Prism Books Pvt. Ltd.</strong>
</p>
<p>Bengaluru | Chennai | Hyderabad | Kochi | Kolkata</p>
<p>
<strong>Surya Namaskara</strong>
</p>
<p>by Rajendra Damodara Yenkannamoole</p>
<p>Published by:</p>
<p>
<strong>Prism Books Pvt. Ltd.</strong>
</p>
<p># 1865, 32nd Cross, 10th Main, BSK II Stage, <strong>Bengaluru</strong> - 560 070.</p>
<p>Phone: 080-26714108 | Telefax: 080-26713979</p>
<p>email: info@prismbooks.com | www.prismbooks.com</p>
<p>
<em>Also at:</em>
</p>
<p><strong>Chennai : </strong>Tel.: 044-24311244, email: prismchennai@prismbooks.com</p>
<p><strong>Hyderabad : </strong>Tel.: 040-27612938, email: prismhyderabad@prismbooks.com</p>
<p><strong>Kochi : </strong>Tel.: 0484-4000945, email: prismkochi@prismbooks.com</p>
<p><strong>Kolkata : </strong>Tel.: 033-24297957, email: prismkolkata@prismbooks.com</p>
<p>All rights reserved. No part of this book shall be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, magnetic, photographic including photocopying, recording or by any information storage and retrieval system, without prior written permission of the author. No parent liability is assumed with respect to use of information contained herein. Although every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher and the author assumes no responsibility for errors or omissions. Neither is any liability assumed for damages resulting from the use of the information contained herein.</p>
<p>© Rajendra Damodara Yenkannamoole, 2017</p>
<p>Please, send your comments to Rajendra Damodara Yenkannamoole</p>
<p>E-mail: vasudevakriyayoga@gmail.com</p>
<p>www.vasudevakriyayoga.com</p>
<p>YouTube/facebook: Vasudeva Kriya Yoga Melbourne, Bangalore</p>
<p>Pages: 168</p>
<p>Printed on 80 gsm Maplitho</p>
<p><em>India:</em><span><sub> </sub></span>`<span><sub> </sub></span>275.00</p>
<p><em>Abroad:</em> US$ 20</p>
<p>ISBN: 978-81-7286-234-3</p>
<p>Book Design: enablePrint Services Pvt. Ltd., Bengaluru.</p>
<p>Printers: Sreeranga Printers Pvt. Ltd., Bengaluru</p>
<p>कृष्णं वन्दे जगद्गुरुम्<em>Krishnam Vande Jagadgurum</em></p>
<p>Salutations to Lord Vasudeva, the Guru of the universe, indweller of all.</p>
<p>बुद्धिर्बलं यशो धैर्यं निर्भयत्वमरोगता ।</p>
<p>अजाड्यं वाक्पटुत्वं च हनूमत्स्मरणाद् भवेत् ।।</p>
<p>
<em>Buddir Balam Yasho Dhairyam Nirbhayatvam Arogatha</em>
</p>
<p>
<em>AjadyamVakpatutwam cha Hanumat Smaranat bhavet.</em>
</p>
<p>
<em>By contemplating on Hanuman one gets all 8 siddis (perfections) — </em>
<em/>
<em>intelligence, strength, glory, courage, fearlessness, good health, </em>
<em/>
<em>no laziness and mastery over speech.</em>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Preface</strong>
</p>
<p>The Hata Yoga Pradipika says that, “<em>One becomes a sidda (perfect) </em><em>through practice alone and not by merely reading the scriptures or </em><em>changing the colour of the cloth or discussing about it</em>. <em>Anyone young, </em><em>old, weak or sick who practices </em>relentlessly<em> with dedication will attain </em><em>perfection in yoga</em>”.</p>
<p>The first section<strong> </strong>in this book deals with<strong> Surya Namaskara</strong>. <strong>Surya Namaskara</strong> also referred to as <em>Sun Salutation</em> is gaining popularity all over the world. Many, substitute intense workouts with <strong>Surya Namaskaras</strong> and label these as <em>Suryathons</em>. The scriptures propound that <em>whatever one does should be divinised and offered as Yajna </em><em>(worship)</em> in order to derive full benefits. With this understanding a Suryathon can be transformed into a <em>Surya Yajna</em>.</p>
<p>Surya Namaskara is undoubtedly a complete solution for one’s psychosomatic – body and mind well-being. It de-stresses the mind and strengthens the <em>circulatory</em>, <em>respiratory</em>, <em>digestive</em>, <em>excretory</em>, <em>reproductive, nervous</em> and <em>endocrine</em> systems.</p>
<p><em>In an exercise to analyse the benefits and effects of </em><strong>Surya Namaskara</strong><em> </em><em>on my body, I performed </em>108<em> repetitions of the </em>16<strong>-step Surya Namaskara</strong><em> in </em>18<em> minutes and recorded the following observations:</em></p>
<dl>
<dt>• </dt>
<dd><em>Rise in heart rate from </em>80<em> bpm to </em>160<em> bpm.</em></dd>
<dt>• </dt>
<dd><em>Drop in blood pressure from </em>120<em>/</em>80<em> to </em>100<em>/</em>60</dd>
<dt>• </dt>
<dd>
</dd>
</dl>
<p>The effects of Surya Namaskara reach far beyond the psychosomatic level to benefit the practitioner at the soul (jiva) level<em>.</em></p>
<p><em>Shat Prashnopanishad</em> says that the soul (<em>jiva) </em>is bound by 15 things and they are:</p>
<p>1. <strong>Kham</strong>: Space 2. <strong>Vayu</strong>: Air 3. <strong>Agni</strong>: Fire 4. <strong>Aapa</strong>: Water 5. <strong>Pritvi</strong>: Earth 6. <strong>Karmendriya</strong> and <strong>Jnanendriya</strong>: Legs, hands, mouth, anus, genital, eyes, ears, nose, tongue, skin 7. <strong>Mana</strong>: Mind 8. <strong>Ahara</strong>: Food – type of food we eat 9. <strong>Veerya</strong>: Stamina – getting fat or lean 10. <strong>Tapa</strong>: Thinking 11. <strong>Mantra</strong>: Talking 12. <strong>Karma</strong>: Action- what we think; that we do. 13. <strong>Loka</strong>: Our possessions, properties 14. <strong>Nama</strong>: Name and Fame- we do things for name and fame 15. <strong>Shradda</strong>: Belief – family traditions, social beliefs, our convictions etc.</p>
<p>The number 16 represents the <strong>jiva</strong> (<em>soul)</em>, number 17 represents <strong>Prakruti</strong> (<em>Lakshmi</em>) and number 18 represents the <strong>Purusha</strong> (<em>Narayana</em>).</p>
<p>By divinising <strong>Surya Namaskara</strong> the soul (<em>jiva) can be </em>progressed towards Purusha. This is the definition of Yoga – joining the individual soul (<em>jiva</em>) with the Supreme (<em>Purusha, Paramatma</em>).</p>
<p>The second section of this book explains <strong>Pranayama</strong> in detail. <strong>Pranayama</strong> helps in purifying the nadis (<em>subtle pathways of prana </em><em>/ breath</em>). When the nadis are purified - the frequency of breathing can be reduced thereby leading to longevity, digestive fire becomes activated, inner sound can be heard and perfect health can be enjoyed. <strong>Pranayama</strong> is the link between the body and the mind. <strong>Pranayama</strong> helps in improving the body immunity. The <em>Sandhya Vandana </em><em>pranayama</em> has been included in the <strong>Pranayama</strong> section for the benefit of all serious spiritual seekers.</p>
<p><strong>Mudras</strong> and <strong>Bandhas</strong> are dealt with in the third section. <strong>Mudras</strong> and <strong>Bandhas</strong> help in conserving and redirecting the energy within the body. The inner energy must be channelised properly for the inherent personality to blossom.</p>
<p>The fourth section deals with <strong>acupressure</strong> points in the palms and feet. Diseases frequent the body when the flow of energy in the nadis is obstructed. When these blocks are cleared, the body becomes disease free. The energy blocks can be removed and the whole body can be energised in a fun and simple way by combining star jumps with hand-claps.</p>
<p>For the benefit of practitioners, we have embedded QR codes linking the techniques discussed in the book to related Vasudeva Kriya Yoga videos.</p>
<p>My earlier book is called Vasudeva Kriya Yoga – Divinity in Yoga. This book also follows the footsteps of my earlier book by divinising Surya Namaskara.</p>
<p>I am offering this book to my dear father, Late Shri Damodara, who was a great Karma Yogi and a devotee of the Lord.</p>
<p>I thank many students and volunteers for their continued support in bringing out this book.</p>
<p>I thank Shri Pranesh from Prism Books Pvt Ltd for editing and publishing this book.</p>
<p>This book is dedicated to all the students of Yoga.</p>
<p>
<strong>ShubhamastuRajendra Damodara Yenkannamoole</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Table of Content</strong>
</p>
<p>Surya Namaskara 1</p>
<p>Pranayama 35</p>
<p>Mudra and Bandha 65</p>
<p>Accupressure and Health 103</p>
<p>Appendix:</p>
<p>Image Index 109</p>
<p>Word Index 123</p>
<p>Class Prayer 125</p>
<p>Surya Namaskara – <em>with</em> Pranayama, Mudras & Bandha and Accupressure</p>
<p>7</p>
<p>6</p>
<p>Surya Namaskara</p>
<p>
<strong>Mundakopanishad</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em>Om Hiranmaye pare koshe virajam brahma nishkalam</em>
</p>
<p>
<em> tat shubhram jyotisham jyotish tad yadatmavidho viduhu</em>
</p>
<p>
<span>ॐ हिरण्मये परे कोशे विराजं ब्रह्म निष्कलम् ।</span>
</p>
<p>
<span>तत् शुभ्रं ज्योतिषं ज्योतिः तद् यदात्मविदो विदुः ।।</span>
</p>
<p>‘The stainless, indivisible Brahman, the pure, the light of all lights, is in the innermost sheath of the golden hue-the highest. This is what the knowers of the Self know.’</p>
<p>
<strong>Gayatri dhyana Sloka</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em>Om Prodyad Aditya varnascha surya mandala madyagah </em>
<em>chakrashanka dharonkastha dordwayo dhyeya eva cha</em>
</p>
<p>
<em>Dhyeyah sada savitrmandala madhya varthee</em>
<em/>
<em>Narayana sarasijasana sannivihtah</em>
</p>
<p>
<em>keyuravan makarakundalavan kireetee </em>
<em/>
<em>haaree hiranmaya vapuh dhrita shankha chakrah</em>
</p>
<p>ॐ प्रोद्यदादित्यवर्णश्च सूर्यमण्डलमध्यगः ।</p>
<p>चक्रशङ्खधरोऽङ्कस्थदोर्द्वयो ध्येय एव च ।।</p>
<p>ध्येयः सदा सवितृमण्डलमध्यवर्ती नारायणः सरसिजासनसन्निविष्टः ।</p>
<p>
<span>केयूरवान् मकरकुण्डलवान् किरीटी हारी हिरण्मयवपुः धृतशङ्खचक्रः ।।</span>
</p>
<p>‘When you sit for meditation, think of the rising, orange colored sun in your heart centre. Within the sun, think of the Lord seated in Padmasana with two hands on the knees, and holding discus and conch in the other two hands, wearing crocodile shaped ear rings and a crown. Thinking of the Lord this way, repeat the Gayatri mantra.’</p>
<p>
<strong>Rig Veda</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em>Om Tachakshu deva hitam shukramacharat pasyema sharadam </em>
<em>shatam jivema sharadam shatam nandama sharadam shatam </em>
<em>modama sharadam shatam bhavama sharadam shatam shrun</em>
<em/>
<em>avama sharadam shatam pabravama sharadam shatam ajita </em>
<em>syama shradam shatam jyok pasyema suryam drishe Om.</em>
</p>
<p>
<span>ॐ तच्चक्षुर्देव हितं शुक्रमचरद् पश्येम शरदां शतम् जीवेम शरदां शतम् नन्दाम शरदां शतम् </span>
<span>मोदाम शरदां शतम् भवाम शरदां शतम् शृणवाम शरदां शतम् प्रब्रुवाम शरदां शतम् </span>
<span>अजिताः स्याम शरदां शतम् ज्योक् पश्येम सूर्यं दृशे ॐ</span>
</p>
<p>‘May we see and do actions pleasing to God for 100 years. That sun, who does good, is like an eye to the God, the pure light that rises in the east. Let us mix in joy for 100 years with our own people. May we be happy for 100 years. May we be bright with good fame for 100 years. May we hear pleasant things for 100 years. May we speak good things for 100 years. May we not be soiled by bad defeat for 100 years. May we not be a burden to others when we are old and infirm. May we see God in all for 100 years.’</p>
<p>
<strong>Aitareya Upanishad</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em>Om udvayam tamasaspari jyotis pasyanta uttaram</em>
</p>
<p>
<em>Devam devatraa suryamaganma jyothiruthamam</em>
<em/>
<span>ॐ उद्द्वयं तमसस्परि ज्योतिष्पश्यन्त उत्तरम् ।</span>
</p>
<p>
<span>देवं देवत्रा सूर्यमगन्म ज्योतिरुत्तमम् ।।</span>
</p>
<p>I am awakened now from my ignorance and seeing the most auspicious Light. This Light is worshipped by all divine beings and I am merging myself with that Light.</p>
<p>
<strong>Isavasya Upanishad</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em>Om Hirnmayena PatreNa Satyasya apihitam Mukham </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>Tat Twam Pooshanna aavruNu Satya Dharmaya Drishtaye</em>
</p>
<p>
<span>ॐ हिरण्मयेन पात्रेण सत्यस्यापिहितं मुखम् ।</span>
</p>
<p>
<span>तत्त्वं पूषन्नपावृणु सत्यधर्माय दृष्टये ।।</span>
</p>
<p>‘O Protector Sun, please remove the golden plate covering your face (by whose radiance I am unable to see the Truth) so that the Truth may be revealed to me.’</p>
<p><strong>Bhagawat Gita </strong>15<SPAN class="bold"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-">th<\/a><\/sup></span><strong> chapter</strong></p>
<p>
<em>Om yad aditya gatam tejo jagad bhasayate akhilam</em>
</p>
<p><em>yat chandramasi yachagnau tat tejo viddhi mamakam</em><em/><span>ॐ यद् आदित्यगतं तेजो जगद् भासय</span>तेऽखिलम् ।</p>
<p>यच्चन्द्रमसि यच्चाग्नौ तत् तेजो विद्धि मामकम् ।।</p>
<p>Lord Shri Krishna says - ‘The splendour of the sun, which dissipates the darkness of this whole world, comes from Me. And the splendour of the moon and the splendour of fire are also from Me.’</p>
<p><strong>Bhagawat Gita </strong>13<SPAN class="bold"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-">th<\/a><\/sup></span><strong> chapter</strong></p>
<p>
<em>Om</em>
<em>jyotisham api tat jyoti tamasah param ucyate</em>
</p>
<p>
<em>jnanaḿ jneyam jnana gamyam hridi sarvasya dhistitam</em>
</p>
<p>ॐ ज्योतिषामपि तज्ज्योतिः तमसः परमुच्यते ।</p>
<p>
<span>ज्ञानं ज्ञेयं ज्ञानगम्यं हृदि सर्वस्य विष्टितम् ।।</span>
</p>
<p>‘He is the source of light in all luminous objects. He is beyond the darkness of matter and is unmanifested. He is knowledge, He is the object of knowledge and He is the goal of knowledge. He is situated in everyone’s heart.’</p>
<p>There is a numerology in Surya Namaskar. To understand the scriptures we need know the numerology. Numerology gives a clear direction to philosophy. <em>Surya Namaskara</em> given here has 16 steps. This has numerological significance. Bhagawat Gita has 18 chapters. The number 18 is divine - the highest. The number 18 means the Lord <em>(Purushottama).</em> The number 17 means akshara (Lakshmi). The number 16 is the individual soul. This individual soul is bound and caught up by 15 things. By His Grace if this 16 (individual soul) turns its attention to 18 (the Lord), 17 (<em>akshara</em> -Lakshmi) paves the way to the souls journey towards Him. If not, 17 (<em>akshara</em> -Lakshmi) binds 16 (individual soul) with 15 aspects. This is the message of the 15th Chapter Bhagawat Gita and this is the message of whole Bhagawat Gita. The 15 things which binds the individual soul are:</p>
<dl>
<dt>1. </dt>
<dd><em>Kham: </em>Space</dd>
<dt>2. </dt>
<dd><em>Vayu: </em>Air</dd>
<dt>3. </dt>
<dd><em>Agni: </em>Fire</dd>
<dt>4. </dt>
<dd><em>Aapa: </em>Water</dd>
<dt>5. </dt>
<dd><em>Pritvi: </em>Earth</dd>
<dt>6. </dt>
<dd><em>Karmedriya</em> and <em>Jnanedriya: </em>Legs, hands, mouth, anus, genital, eyes, ears, nose, tongue, skin</dd>
<dt>7. </dt>
<dd><em>Mana: </em>Mind</dd>
<dt>8. </dt>
<dd><em>Ahara: </em>Food – type of food we eat</dd>
<dt>9. </dt>
<dd><em>Veerya: </em>Stamina – getting fat or lean</dd>
<dt>10. </dt>
<dd><em>Tapa: </em>Thinking</dd>
<dt>11. </dt>
<dd><em>Mantra: </em>Talking</dd>
<dt>12. </dt>
<dd><em>Karma: </em>Action- what we think, that we do.</dd>
<dt>13. </dt>
<dd><em>Loka: </em>Our possessions, properties</dd>
<dt>14. </dt>
<dd><em>Nama: </em>Name and Fame- we do things for name and fame</dd>
<dt>15. </dt>
<dd><em>Shradda:</em> Belief – family traditions, social beliefs, our convictions etc.</dd>
</dl>
<p><strong>The </strong>16<strong> step Surya Namaskar is the soul’s prayer- may this soul (</strong>16<strong>) turn its attention to the Lord (</strong>18<strong>) and may Lakshmi (</strong>17<strong>) remove all the hurdles in our path.</strong></p>
<p>The number zero in 108 also represents a complete number. Number 108 represents the Supreme Lord’s number. When we do 108 Surya Namaskar with 16 steps in each round we will be doing a total of 108*16 = 1728 steps. If we add this 1+7+2+8 this again become 18 which is a divine number. Through Surya Namaskar we are invoking the Supreme Lord. Yoga means union and Surya Namaskar is a process of linking the individual soul (16) to the Supreme Lord (18).</p>
<p><strong>Different Names of the Lord Surya are below. Chant one mantra at a time and do the </strong>16<strong> steps of Surya Namaskara.</strong></p>
<dl>
<dt>1. </dt>
<dd><em>Om Hram </em><strong>Mitraya</strong><em> Namaha </em>(ॐ ह्रां मित्राय नमः) (stimulates brain, heart, respiratory organs, lungs, chest ) (<strong>friend</strong> of all)</dd>
<dt>2. </dt>
<dd><em>Om Hrim </em><strong>Ravaye</strong><em> Namaha</em> (ॐ ह्रीं रवये नमः) (invigorates throat, heart, digestive system) (<strong>Praised</strong> by all)</dd>
<dt>3. </dt>
<dd><em>Om Hrum </em><strong>Suryaya</strong><em> Namaha </em>(ॐ ह्रुं सूर्याय नमः) (strengthens liver, spleen, stomach, uterus) (<strong>Stimulator</strong> of all)</dd>
<dt>4. </dt>
<dd><em>Om Hraim </em><strong>Bhanave</strong><em> Namaha </em>(ॐ ह्रैं भानवे नमः) (<strong>stimulates</strong> the kidneys) (Giver of lustre to all)</dd>
<dt>5. </dt>
<dd><em>Om Hroum </em><strong>Khagaya</strong><em> Namaha </em>(ॐ ह्रौं खगाय नमः) (normalizes the function of rectum and anus) (<strong>Stimulator</strong> of the senses)</dd>
<dt>6. </dt>
<dd><em>Om Hrah </em><strong>PusNe</strong><em> Namaha </em>(ॐ ह्रः पूष्णे नमः) (develops throat and chest) (<strong>Nourisher</strong> of all)</dd>
<dt>7. </dt>
<dd><em>Om Hram </em><strong>Hiranyagarbhaya</strong><em> Namaha</em> (ॐ ह्रां हिरण्यगर्भाय नमः) (stimulates brain, heart, respiratory organs, lungs, chest (<strong>Developer</strong> of energy and vitality for all)</dd>
<dt>8. </dt>
<dd><em>OM Hrim </em><strong>Marichaye</strong><em> Namaha</em> (ॐ ह्रीं मरीचये नमः) (invigorates the throat, heart and the digestive system) (<strong>Destroyer</strong> of all diseases)</dd>
<dt>9. </dt>
<dd><em>Om Hrum </em><strong>Adityaya</strong><em> Namaha </em><span>(ॐ ह्रूं आदित्याय नमः)</span> (strengthens liver, spleen, stomach and uterus) (<strong>Attracts</strong> all)</dd>
<dt>10. </dt>
<dd><em>Om Hraim </em><strong>Savitre</strong><em> Namaha</em> (ॐ ह्रैं सवित्रे नमः) (stimulates kidney) (<strong>Begetter</strong> of all)</dd>
<dt>11. </dt>
<dd><em>Om Hroum </em><strong>Arkaya</strong><em> Namaha </em>(ॐ ह्रौं अर्काय नमः) (normalizes the function of rectum and anus) (<strong>Fit</strong> to be revered by all)</dd>
<dt>12. </dt>
<dd><em>Om Hrah </em><strong>Bhaskaraya</strong><em> Namaha</em> (ॐ ह्रः भास्कराय नमः) (stimulates the throat and chest) (<strong>Effulgent</strong> in all)</dd>
<dt>13. </dt>
<dd><em>Om Shri Savitra Suryanarayanaya Namaha </em>(ॐ श्री सवित्रे सूर्यनारायणाय नमः)</dd>
</dl>
<p>* Source sVyasa publication</p>
<p>
<strong>Surya Namaskara technique:</strong>
</p>
<p>For the success in Surya Namaskara the following disciplines are recommended:</p>
<dl>
<dt>1. </dt>
<dd>The best time to do the Surya Namaskara is before the sun rise in empty stomach.</dd>
<dt>2. </dt>
<dd>Before Surya Namaskara empty your bowel, brush your teeth and have a bath.</dd>
<dt>3. </dt>
<dd>Wear comfortable clothing and with cheerful mind do Surya Namaskara.</dd>
<dt>4. </dt>
<dd>Perform Surya Namaskara in a well-lit, aerated space, on a flat ground facing east in the morning and west in the evening.</dd>
<dt>5. </dt>
<dt>6. </dt>
<dd>While doing the Surya Namaskara breathe only through your nose.</dd>
<dt>7. </dt>
<dd>Regularity in practice is the key to success.</dd>
<dt>8. </dt>
<dd>Try to do Surya Namaskara daily in the same place as an offering to Surya Narayana (Lord).</dd>
<dt>9. </dt>
<dd>Do Yoga Nidra or Shavasana after Surya Namaskara.</dd>
<dt>10. </dt>
<dd>Make a habit of going to bed early at night and rising up before sun rise.</dd>
<dt>11. </dt>
<dd><em>Ahara Shuddou Sattva shuddihi sattva shuddow </em><em>druva smritihi </em><span>(आहारशुद्धौ सत्त्वशुद्धिः, सत्त्वशुद्धौ ध्रुवा स्मृतिः) </span>– If ones diet is pure, mind also gets purified. Pure mind leads to sharp memory - Chandognya Upanishad. Have food that is succulent, juicy, nourishing, pleasing to the heart and <em>satwic</em> (pure) in quality so that it promotes life, vitality, strength, health, happiness and satisfaction.</dd>
<dt>12. </dt>
<dd>It is said that those who know the <strong>art of eating</strong> are disease free. Food is the best medicine. <strong>Emphasis is laid on chewing food well</strong>. When food is chewed well, it produces sufficient saliva, which in turn helps in digestion. There are some famous sayings about how we should eat. ‘Chew your food as your stomach has no teeth’. ‘Taste your food, your stomach has no taste buds’. ‘Eat to live and not, live to eat’.</dd>
<dt>13. </dt>
<dd>We should know how much to eat. It is said that our stomach should be half full with solids, quarter full with water and a quarter should be empty. The quantity of food we eat depends on the type of work we do. The <em>Vasista Smriti</em> and <em>Varaha Purana</em> say <em>ekadashyam</em> <em>upavaso yam nirmitam paramoushadam </em>(एकादश्यामुपवासो<span>ऽयं निर्मितं परमौषधम् ।)</span> – ‘fasting once a fortnight on the day of <em>ekadashi </em>(the 11th day after a full moon and new moon) is the best medicine.’ Fasting rests the digestive system, digestive fluids get regenerated, and the mind becomes fresh and clear.</dd>
<dt>14. </dt>
<dd>Avoid food that is spicy, salty, hot, sour, which ultimately produces grief as they make the mind restless (<em>rajasic</em>).</dd>
<dt>15. </dt>
<dd>Stay away from food that is stale, without nutrients, smelly or partially eaten by others as they make our mind dull (<em>tamasic</em>).</dd>
<dt>16. </dt>
<dd>Avoid coffee, tea, carbonated drinks and intoxicants.</dd>
<dt>17. </dt>
<dd>Avoid non vegetarian food. Consume easily digestible vegetarian food.</dd>
<dt>18. </dt>
<dd>Do not consume food when you are upset, angry or in fear.</dd>
<dt>19. </dt>
<dd>Do not eat when you are not hungry.</dd>
<dt>20. </dt>
<dd>Do not eat soon after your bowel evacuation.</dd>
<dt>21. </dt>
<dd>Have food at least half an hour after Surya Namaskara.</dd>
<dt>22. </dt>
<dd>Pregnant women and women during the monthly cycle should avoid Surya Namaskara as it applies pressure on the abdomen.</dd>
<dt>23. </dt>
<dd>Be in the company of noble people.</dd>
<dt>24. </dt>
<dd>Read scriptures daily and reflect on its inner meaning instead of being satisfied with the outer meaning.</dd>
<dt>25. </dt>
<dd>Allocate some time for yourself and to meditate on the Lord daily.</dd>
</dl>
<p><strong>The </strong>16<strong> Surya Namaskara steps</strong></p>
<p>1<strong>. Sama Stiti (Relax)</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p><em>Sama Stiti</em> means relaxed and balanced position.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>Improves the alertness.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Stand upright with big toes together. Bring your palms in to <em>anjali mudra</em> with thumbs touching the heart center</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Chin up and look ahead.</dd>
</dl>
<p>2<strong>. Urdwasana</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p><em>Urdwa </em>means up. Urdwa means upward flowing energy.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>This asana stretches the whole body, flexes the spinal column, destresses the shoulders and neck muscles. This asana opens up the lungs and deepens the breathing.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Stand upright</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>With inhale <em>(puraka)</em> stretch your arms as back as you can with your elbows straight and palms together</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring your biceps closer to your ears</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Look at your palms.</dd>
</dl>
<p>3<strong>. Uttanasana</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p><em>Uttanasana </em>means stretched, intense.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>This asana strengthens the calf muscles, hamstrings, buttocks, and flexes the spinal column, and tones the shoulder and neck muscles. This asana is helpful for stomach and uterus related ailments. It is also helpful for weight loss/obesity and slimming. People with “navel displacement” problem can be cured by this asana</p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>As you exhale <em>(rechaka)</em> bring your palms on the ground next to the feet</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Palms with fingers spread apart are in line with the feet</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep your knees straight and bring your forehead to the knees.</dd>
</dl>
<p>4<strong>. Eka Pada Prasaranasana</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p><em>Eka pada Prasaranasana</em> means one legged extension.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>This asana strengthens the hip region, leg muscles, abdominal muscles and toes.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Retain your palms with widespread fingers as it is and with inhalation <em>(puraka)</em> stretch out your right leg as back as you can and bring your right big toe on the ground.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring your left calf muscle and hamstring together</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Push your left heel down while keeping your fingers spread apart</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring your right knee on the ground.</dd>
</dl>
<p>5<strong>. Hanumasana</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p>Hanuman means one who has beautiful jaws. Hanuman is the incarnation of <em>Vayu deva</em> and is a Foremost devotee of Lord Shri Ram.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This asana strengthens the back muscles, buttocks, hips and leg muscles. This destresses shoulders, spinal column and opens up the lungs</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Holding the breath inside (antar kumbaka), raise your arms, bringing the palms together, keeping the elbows straight and biceps touching your ears.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring your biceps to your ears</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep left calf muscle and hamstring together</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Push your left heel down</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Stretch back as much as you can</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Look at your palms.</dd>
</dl>
<p>6<strong>. Eka Pada Prasaranasana </strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p><em>Eka pada Prasaranasana</em> means one legged extension.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This asana strengthens the hip region, leg muscles, abdominal muscles and toes.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>With exhalation (rechaka) bring your palms to the ground on either side of the left foot and spread your fingers wide apart</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep your elbows straight.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring your left calf muscle and hamstring together</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Push your left heel down and spread your fingers apart.</dd>
</dl>
<p>7<strong>. Dwi Pada Prasaranasana</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p><em>Dwi pada Prasaranasana</em> means both legged extension.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This asana strengthens the hands, shoulders, back, hip region, leg muscles, abdominal muscles and toes.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>With inhalation <em>(puraka)</em> stretch out the other leg also and bring both big toes in one line</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring both knees above the ground and keep your back straight</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep your elbows straight and look ahead</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
</dl>
<p>8<strong>. Shashankasana</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p><em>Shashanka</em> means rabbit. <em>Shashi</em> means mind.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This asana energises the abdominal muscles, squeezes the lower and middle lungs and activates the upper lungs. This asana relaxes the mind, stretches the shoulder and back muscles, increases blood flow to the brain and energizes degenerated brain cells. People with migraine problem find this beneficial.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>With exhalation <em>(rechaka)</em> bring your buttocks on your heels and your forehead on the ground</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep your elbows straight.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring your chest on your thighs</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring big toes together</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Do not move your palms and toes.</dd>
</dl>
<p>9<strong>. Sastanga Namaskara: </strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p><em>Skanda Purarana</em> defines sastanga namaskara as</p>
<p>
<em>Urasa shirasa dristya </em>
<em/>
<em>manasa vachasa tata</em>
</p>
<p>
<em>padbhyam karabhyam janubhyam</em>
<em/>
<em>pranamo astanga reeritaha</em>
</p>
<p>उरसा शिरसा दृष्ट्या मनसा वचसा तथा ।</p>
<p>पद्भ्यां कराभ्यां जानुभ्यां प्रणामोऽष्टाङ्ग ईरितः ।।</p>
<p>Mind is full of reverence, eyes are full of devotion, mouth is glorifying Him, while head, hands, chest, thighs and feet are at the Feet of Him.</p>
<p>Hold the breath out <em>(Bahya kumbhaka)</em> mind, eyes, mouth in praise of the Lord and forehead, palms, chest, knees, and feet on the ground is <em>astanga namaskara</em> (complete 8 limbed surrender). We are not holding anything within and even the air we have exhaled. In yoga this is<em> bhakti, sharanagati </em>or devotion.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This asana relaxes the mind, strengthens the hands. People with migraine problem finds this beneficial.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring your forehead, chest and knees on the ground and elbows up</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Do not move your palms and toes.</dd>
</dl>
<p>10<strong>. Urdwa Mukha Swanasana</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p><em>Urdwa mukha</em> means upward turned face. <em>Swana</em> means dog</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This asana helps people with asthma and bronchitis and shoulder, back and thyroid problems. This activates thyroid, thymus and pineal glands</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Feel the flexing of your spinal column, stretch in your neck and shoulder muscles and opening of the chest muscles</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep the big toes together and do not move your toe and palm positions.</dd>
</dl>
<p>11<strong>. Ado Mukha Swanasana</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p><em>Ado mukha </em>means face turned downward. <em>Swana </em>means dog.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This asana strengthens the arms, and legs, energises the brain cells, internal organs, spinal column, kidneys and liver, releases tension from the shoulder and back muscles and helps stretch the hamstring muscles, calf muscles and Achilles tendons. This energizes the kidneys and abdominal muscles.</p>
<p>It purifies the blood, improves memory, decompresses the internal organs, rehydrates the discs in the spine, slows down the heart rate, massages the heart muscles and oxygenates the blood. People with cholesterol problem will find this asana beneficial.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>The elbows should be straight with the fingers spread wide apart</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Straighten the knees and push your tailbone up</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Push the crown of your head towards the ground</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring your heels on the ground</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Feel the stretch on your shoulders, back, buttocks, hamstring, calf and Achilles tendons</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring your big toes together.</dd>
</dl>
<p>12<strong>. Shashankasana</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p><em>Shashanka</em> means rabbit. <em>Shashi</em> means mind.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This asana energises the abdominal muscles, squeezes the lower and middle lungs and activates the upper lungs. This asana relaxes the mind, stretches the shoulder and back muscles, increases blood flow to the brain and energizes degenerated brain cells. People with migraine problem finds this beneficial.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Holding the breath out <em>(bhahya kumbhaka)</em> bring your buttocks on your heels and bring your forehead on the ground</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep your elbows straight</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring your chest on your thighs</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring big toes together</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Do not move your palms and toes.</dd>
</dl>
<p>13<strong>. Eka Pada Prasaranasana</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Eka pada Prasaranasana</em> means one legged extension.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>This asana strengthens the hip region, leg muscles, abdominal muscles and toes.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>With inhalation <em>(puraka)</em> bring your right foot between your palms</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring your right calf muscle and hamstring together</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Push your right heel down and spread your fingers apart</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep your elbows straight. </dd>
</dl>
<p>14<strong>. Hanumasana </strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p>Hanuman means one who has beautiful jaws. Hanuman is the incarnation of <em>Vayu deva</em> and is a great devotee of Lord Shri Ram.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This asana strengthens the back muscles, buttocks, hips and leg muscles. This destresses shoulders, spinal column and opens up the lungs.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Holding the breath inside <em>(antar kumbaka)</em> raise your arms and bring the palms together keeping elbows straight</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring your biceps to your ears</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep right calf muscle and hamstring together</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Push your right heel down</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Stretch back as much as you can</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Look at your palms.</dd>
</dl>
<p>15<strong>. Eka Pada Prasaranasana</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p><em>Eka pada Prasaranasana</em> means one legged extension.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This asana strengthens the hip region, leg muscles, abdominal muscles and toes.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>With exhalation (rechaka) bring your palms to the ground on either side of the right foot and spread your fingers wide apart.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep your right calf muscle and hamstring together.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Push your right heel down and spread your fingers apart</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep your elbows straight. </dd>
</dl>
<p>16<strong>. Uttanasana</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Uttanasana </em>means stretched, intense.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This asana strengthens the calf muscles, hamstrings, buttocks, flexes the spinal column, tones the shoulder and neck muscles. This asana is helpful for stomach and uterus related ailments. It is also helpful for weight loss/obesity and slimming. People with “navel displacement” problem can be cured by this asana.`</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Holding the breath out <em>(bahya </em><em>kumbhaka)</em> bring your palms on the ground next to the feet</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring your feet and palms in one line with fingers spread apart</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep your knees straight and bring your forehead to the knees.</dd>
</dl>
<p>1<strong>. Sama Stiti (Relax)</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p><em>Sama Stiti</em> means relaxed and balanced position.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>Improves the alertness.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>With inhalation stand upright with big toes together. Bring your palms in to <em>anjali mudra</em> with thumbs touching the heart center</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Chin up and look ahead.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Breathing sequence summary:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>1. </dt>
<dd><em>Sama Stiti</em> (<em>Relax</em>)</dd>
<dt>2. </dt>
<dt>3. </dt>
<dd><em>Uttanasana:</em> Exhale <em>(Rechaka)</em> - Strengthens the calf muscles, hamstrings, buttocks, flexes the spinal column, tones the shoulder and neck muscles</dd>
<dt>4. </dt>
<dd><em>Eka Pada Prasaranasana:</em> Inhale <em>(Puraka)</em> - Strengthens the lower back and leg muscles</dd>
<dt>5. </dt>
<dd><em>Hanumasana:</em> Hold the breath in <em>(Antar kumbaka)</em> - Opens up the lungs, strengthens the leg muscles, flexes the spinal column</dd>
<dt>6. </dt>
<dd><em>Eka Pada Prasaranasana:</em> Exhale <em>(Rechaka)</em> - Strengthens the lower back and leg muscles</dd>
<dt>7. </dt>
<dd><em>Dwi Pada Prasaranasana:</em> Inhale <em>(Puraka), </em>- Strengthens both hands and feet</dd>
<dt>8. </dt>
<dd><em>Shashankasana:</em> Exhale <em>(Rechaka)</em> - Calms the mind. Blood flow to the brain increases, degenerated brain cells get energized</dd>
<dt>9. </dt>
<dd><em>Sastanga Namaskara:</em> Hold the breath out <em>(Bhahya </em><em>kumbhaka)</em> - Mind, eyes, mouth in praise of the Lord and forehead, palms, chest, knees, and feet on the ground, complete 8 limbed surrender</dd>
<dt>10. </dt>
<dd><em>Urdwa Mukha Swanasana:</em> Inhale <em>(Puraka)</em> - Flexes the spinal column, opens up the lungs, activates thyroid, thymus pineal glands</dd>
<dt>11. </dt>
<dd><em>Adho mukha swanasana:</em> Exhale <em>(Rechaka)</em> - Strengthens the hands and leg muscles, energises the kidneys and abdominal muscles</dd>
<dt>12. </dt>
<dd><em>Shashankasana:</em> Hold the breath out <em>(Bhahya Kumbhaka)</em>  - Calms the mind, blood flow to the brain increases, degenerated brain cells get energized</dd>
<dt>13. </dt>
<dd><em>Eka Pada Prasaranasana:</em> Inhale <em>(Puraka)</em> - Strengthens the lower back and leg muscles</dd>
<dt>14. </dt>
<dd><em>Hanumasana:</em> Hold the breath in <em>(Antar kumbaka), - Opens</em> up the lungs, strengthens the leg muscles, flexes the spinal column</dd>
<dt>15. </dt>
<dd><em>Eka Pada Prasaranasana:</em> Exhale <em>(Rechaka)</em> - Strengthens the lower back and leg muscles</dd>
<dt>16. </dt>
<dd><em>Uttanasana:</em> Hold breath out <em>(Bhahya Kumbhaka)</em> - Strengthens the calf muscles, hamstrings, buttocks, flexes the spinal column, tones shoulder and neck muscles</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>www.youtube.com/watch?v=qkFvy_x0HsU</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8kTJwGu5mDU</p>
<p>
<table>
<tr>
<td>
<p>108<strong> Surya Yajna Namavali</strong></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रां मित्राय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hram Mitraya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>2</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रीं रवये नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrim Ravaye Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>3</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<span>ॐ ह्रूं सूर्याय नमः</span>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrum Suryaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>4</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रैं भानवे नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraim Bhanave Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>5</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रौं खगाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hroum Khagaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>6</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रः पूष्णे नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraha Pooshne Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>7</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रं हिरण्यगर्भाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hram Hiranyagarbhaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>8</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रीं मरीचये नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrim Mareechaye Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>9</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रूं आदित्याय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrum Adityaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>10</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रैं सवित्रे नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraim Savitre Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>11</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रौं अर्काय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hroum Arkaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>12</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रः भास्कराय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraha Bhaskaraya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>13</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रां अरुणाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hram Arunaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>14</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रीं शरण्याय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrim Sharanyaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>15</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रुं करुणाकरसिन्धवे नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrum Karunakara Sindhave Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>16</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रैं असमानबलाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraim Asamana Balaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>17</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रौं अर्थरक्षकाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hroum Artha Rakshakaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>18</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रः आदिभूताय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraha Aadi Bootaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>19</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रां अखिलज्ञानाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hram Akhilajnaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>20</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रीं इनाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrim Inave Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>21</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रुं विश्वरूपाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrum Viswaroopaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>22</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रैं इज्याय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraim Ijyaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>23</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रौं इन्द्राय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hroum Indraya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>24</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रः ईशाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraha Ishaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>25</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रां सुप्रसन्नाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hram Suprasannaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>26</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रीं सुशीलाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrim Susheelaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>27</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<span>ॐ ह्रुं सुवर्चसे नमः</span>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrum Suvarchase Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>28</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<span>ॐ ह्रैं वसुप्रदाय नमः</span>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraim Vasupradaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>29</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रौं वसवे नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hroum Vasave Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>30</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रः वासुदेवाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraha Vasudevaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>31</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रां उज्ज्वलाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hram Ujvalaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>32</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रीं उग्ररूपाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrim Ugraroopaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>33</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रूं ऊर्ध्वगाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrum Urdwagaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>34</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<span>ॐ ह्रैं विवस्वते नमः</span>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraim Vivaswate Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>35</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रौं वीर्याय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hroum Veeryaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>36</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रः निर्जराय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraha Nirjaraya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>37</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रां जयाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hram Jayaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>38</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रीं ऋषिवन्द्याय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrim Rishi Vandyaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>39</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<span>ॐ ह्रूं युक्तसारथये नमः</span>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrum Yukta Sarathaye Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>40</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रैं नित्यस्तुताय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraim Nityastutaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>41</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रौं उज्ज्वलतेजसे नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hroum Ujwala Tejase Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>42</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रः शान्ताय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraha Shantaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>43</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रां कान्तिदाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hram Kantidaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>44</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रीं घनाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrim Ghanaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>45</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रुं क्वणत्कनकभूषाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrum Kanatkanaka Bhooshaya</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>46</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<span>ॐ ह्रैं सत्यानन्दस्वरूपिणे नमः</span>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraim Satyanada Swarupine Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>47</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रौं अपवर्गप्रदाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hroum Apavarga Pradaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>48</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<span>ॐ ह्रः सृष्टिस्थित्यन्तकारिणे नमः</span>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Om Hraha Srishti Sthityanta Karine</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>49</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रां गुणात्मने नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hram Gunatmane Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>50</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<span>ॐ ह्रीं बृहते नमः</span>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrim Brihate Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>51</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रुं ब्रह्मणे नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrum Brahmane Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>52</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रैं ऐश्वर्यदाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraim Iswaryadaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>53</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रौं शर्वाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hroum Sharvaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>54</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रः हरिदस्वयाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraha Haridaswayaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>55</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रां ओजस्कराय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hram Ojasakaraya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>56</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रां जयिने नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrim Jayine Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>57</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<span>ॐ ह्रूं जगदानन्दहेतवे नमः</span>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrum Jagadanada Hetave Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>58</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रैं जन्ममृत्युजराव्याधिवर्जिताय</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraim Janma Mrityu Jara Vyadhi</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>59</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रौं कमनीयकान्ताय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hroum Kamaneeya Kantaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>60</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रः अन्तर्बहिःप्रकाशाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraha Antarbahi Prakashaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>61</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रां अचिन्त्याय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hram Achintyaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>62</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रीं आत्मरूपिणे नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrim Atma Rupine Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>63</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रुं अहस्कराय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrum Ahaskaraya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>64</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रैं तारुण्याय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraim Tarunyaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>65</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रौं सौख्यप्रदाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hroum Soukya Pradaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>66</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रः तेजोरूपाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraha Tejo Roopaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>67</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रां इष्टार्थदाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hram Istarthadaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>68</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रीं श्रेयसे नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Om Hrim Shreyase Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>69</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रुं नित्यानन्दाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrum Nityanadaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>70</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रैं प्राणाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraim Pranaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>71</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रौं अपानाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hroum Apanaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>72</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रः व्यानाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraha Vyanaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>73</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रां उदानाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hram Udanaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>74</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रीं समानाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrim Samanaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>75</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<span>ॐ ह्ुं केशवाय नमः</span>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrum Keshavaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>76</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रैं नारायणाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraim Narayanaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>77</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रौं माधवाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hroum Madhavaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>78</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रः गोविन्दाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraha Govindaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</p>
<p>Picture 1: Sama Stiti</p>
<p>Picture 2: Urdwasana</p>
<p>Picture 3: Uttanasana</p>
<p>Picture 4: Eka Pada Prasaranasana</p>
<p>Picture 5: Hanumasana</p>
<p>Picture 6: Eka Pada Prasaranasana</p>
<p>Picture 7: Dwi Pada Prasaranasana</p>
<p>Picture 8: Shashankasana</p>
<p>Picture 9: Sastanga Namaskara</p>
<p>Picture 10: Urdwa Mukha Swanasana</p>
<p>Picture 11: Ado Mukha Swanasana</p>
<p>Picture 12: Shashankasana</p>
<p>Picture 13: Eka Pada Prasaranasana</p>
<p>Picture 14: Hanumasana</p>
<p>Picture 15: Eka Pada Prasaranasana</p>
<p>Picture 16: Uttanasana</p>
<p>Picture 17: Sama Stiti</p>
<p>Surya Namaskara – <em>with</em> Pranayama, Mudras & Bandha and Accupressure</p>
<p>31</p>
<p>30</p>
<p>Surya Namaskara</p>
<p>
<table>
<tr>
<td>
<p>80</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रीं मधुसूदनाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrim Madhusoodanaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>81</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रूं त्रिविक्रमाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrum Trivikramaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>82</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रैं वामनाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraim Vamanaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>83</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रौं श्रीधराय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hroum Shridharaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>84</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रः हृषीकेशाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraha Hrishikeshaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>85</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रां पद्मनाभाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hram Padmanabhaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>86</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रीं दामोदराय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrim Damodaraya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>87</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रुं सङ्कर्षणाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrum Sankarshanaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>88</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<span>ॐ ह्रैं वासुदेवाय नमः</span>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraim Vasudevaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>89</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रौं प्रद्युम्नाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hroum Pradymnaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>90</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रः अनिरुद्धाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraha Anirudhaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>91</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रां पुरुषोत्तमाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hram Purushothamaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>92</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रीं अधोक्षजाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrim Adokshajaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>93</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रुं नरसिंहाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrum Narasimhaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>94</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रैं अच्युताय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraim Achutaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>95</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रौं जनार्दनाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hroum Janardhanaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>96</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रः उपेन्द्राय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraha Upendraya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>97</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रां हरये नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hram Haraye Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>98</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रीं कृष्णाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrim Krishnaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>99</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रूं विश्वाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrum Viswaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>100</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रैं अक्षराय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraim Aksharaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>101</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रौं योगाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hroum Yogaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>102</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रः योगविदां नेत्रे नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraha Yogavidam Netre Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>103</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रां प्राणदाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hram Pranadaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>104</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रीं प्राणाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrim Pranaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>105</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रुं सिद्धाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hrum Sidhaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>106</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रैं रुद्राय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraim Rudraya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>107</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रौं अमृताय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hroum Amrutaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>108</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>ॐ ह्रः धन्वन्तरये नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Hraha Dhanvantraya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<TD/>
<td>
<p>ॐ श्री सवित्रे सूर्यनारायणाय नमः</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>\ Shree Savitra Suryanarayanaya Namaha</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</p>
<p>
<strong>16 Step Surya Namaskara</strong>
</p>
<p>34</p>
<p>35</p>
<p>In the fourth chapter of the Bhagawat Gita, Pranayama is defined as <em>Apane juhwati pranam pranapane tathapare pranapana </em><em>gatee rudwa pranayama parayana </em><span>(अपाने जुह्वति प्राणं प्रा</span>णे<span>ऽपानं तथापरे । </span><span>प्राणापनगती रुद्ध्वा प्राणायामपरायणाः ।।) </span>- 'Yogis join the downward flowing prana with the upward flowing prana.' Restraining the breath in or out through antar kumbaka or bahya kumbaka is Pranayama.</p>
<p>
<strong>Pranayama</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Pranayama</strong>
</p>
<p>The real strength to the body comes from the breath. When we want to lift a heavy weight, we inhale and lift it. A boxer before giving the punch, inhales and with exhale gives the punch. A cricket bowler before releasing the ball inhales and with exhalation releases the ball. Yogi becomes strong both physically and mentally by doing pranayama.</p>
<p>It is said that, "those who know the art of breathing, for them, there is no disease". Breath is a link between our body and mind. Like jockey controls the horse through the reins, yogi manages the mind through breath. Whenever we are agitated, angry and restless, our breathing becomes jerky and shallow. Whenever we are calm and relaxed, the breathing becomes smooth and longer. Breathing is an outward indication of the status of our mind.</p>
<p>Mind can be controlled and managed well through the practice of pranayama. So, pranayama is an important tool for managing our emotions and for maintaining good mental health. “Breathing with awareness is called pranayama”.</p>
<p>Prana is not just breathing. Breathing is the external sign of prana. Yogis can live without breathing for a long time. When the Prana leaves the body, breathing stops and that body is then called dead. Since we have prana in the body we are called<em> “Prani.” </em></p>
<p><em>Pra </em>means<em> prakrista </em>which means special. <em>Ana</em> means <em>bala,</em> meaning strength. That which gives strength to us is Prana. There are three Pranas – <em>Mukhya Prana</em> (main Prana), <em>Madhyama </em><em>Prana</em> (middle level Prana) and <em>Adhama Prana</em> (lower Prana). The Supreme indweller, the Lord is <em>Mukhya Prana</em>. Hanuman, who is the vehicle of the Lord, is <em>Madhyama Prana</em>. The individual soul is called <em>Adhama Prana</em>. The <em>Madyama Prana</em> (or Prana) is the Guru for all souls (jivas) who takes them to the <em>Mukhya Prana</em>. Prana takes the individual soul after death to the appropriate destination according to the soul’s karma. There is no rest for Prana, who makes us breathe even when we are asleep.</p>
<p>Prana protects the soul even at the time of universal dissolution. When the <em>Mukhya Prana</em> (Lord) decides to leave the body, Prana also leaves the body. The <em>Shat Prashnopanishad</em> says that the Lord wanted a perfect personal assistant and he chose Prana. In <em>Vishnu </em><em>Sahsranama</em>, the Lord has been described twice as using Prana as His vehicle - <em>Vayu Vahana</em>. The Vedas refer to Prana as <em>dhoo,</em> meaning that death does not come near him. Death is scared to come near those who practice Pranayama.</p>
<p>Our scriptures say that we have various deities who function in the body, like the Sun in the eyes, the Moon in the ears, the Aswini Kumaras in our nostrils, Agni in our mouth, Shiva in the mind, etc. These deities can function in our body only when we have the Prana (vital air) in the body. When the Prana leaves the body, all other deities cannot function any more. <em>Pranayama</em> means getting the grace of <em>Mukhya Prana</em> (the Lord) and <em>Madhyama Prana</em> (Prana- Hanuman) so that <em>Adhama Prana’s</em> (the jiva’s or soul’s) journey towards the Lord continues without any hindrances.</p>
<p>In the fourth chapter of the Bhagawat Gita, <em>Pranayama</em> is defined as <em>Apane juhvati pranam pranapane tathapare pranapana </em><em>gatee rudwa pranayama parayana </em><span>(अपाने जुह्वति प्राणं प्रा</span>णे<span>ऽपानं तथापरे । </span><span>प्राणापनगती रुद्ध्वा प्राणायामपरायणाः ।।)</span> - ‘Yogis join the downward flowing prana with the upward flowing prana.’ Restraining the breath in or out through antar kumbaka or bhahya kumbaka is Pranayama.</p>
<p>Patanjali defines <em>Pranayama</em> as <em>Tasmin Sati Swasa Praswasa </em><em>Yorgati Vicheedana Pranayama</em> – ‘after mastering the<strong> </strong><em>posture, one </em><em>must practice control of Prana by regulat</em>ing the inhalation and exhalation.’ Patanjali further describes the benefits of <em>Pranayama</em> as <em>Tata Ksheeyate Prakasha avaranam</em> ‘The result of <em>Pranayama</em> is that the covering of the <em>inner Light</em> is removed.’ According to the Gheranda Samhita, the body becomes light and energetic by doing <em>Pranayama</em> correctly.</p>
<p>There are 4 phases in Pranayama. They are <em>puraka</em> (inhale), <em>rechaka</em> (exhale), <em>antar kumbhaka</em> (retaining air inside) and <em>bahya </em><em>kumbhaka</em> (holding air outside).</p>
<p>By doing Pranayama, all ten pranas are energized. There are five main pranas and five subtle pranas (<em>upa pranas</em>). The pranas and their functions are given below:</p>
<p>
<table>
<tr>
<td>
<p>
<strong>Main Prana</strong>
</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>
<strong>Upa Prana (subtle prana)</strong>
</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p><em>Prana</em>- Mukha indriya - the whole face <em>indriya</em> - eyes, ears, nose, tongue, skin</p>
</td>
<td>
<p><em>Dhanajaya</em>: Opening and closing of the heart valve; protection of the body even after death</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p><em>Apana</em>- Anus - Excretion.</p>
</td>
<td>
<p><em>Naga</em>: Burping</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p><em>Vyana</em>- Affects the whole body – Gives movement to joints.</p>
</td>
<td>
<p><em>Devadatta</em>: Yawning</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p><em>Udana</em>- Throat – Speech, swallowing. Guides the soul at the time of death. Takes our mind to higher levels.</p>
</td>
<td>
<p><em>Krikala</em>: Sneezing</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p><em>Samana</em>- Navel- Digestion and distribution of food</p>
</td>
<td>
<p><em>Kurma</em>: Blinking</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</p>
<p>Humans normally breathe 15-20 times a minute. Rabbits breathe 60-70 times a minute. Elephants breathe 5-6 times a minute. Tortoises breathe 2-3 times a minute. Rabbits live for 3-5 years. Elephants live for over 100 years. The tortoise lives for about 250 years. There is a direct correlation between lifespan and rate of breathing. By reducing the breathing rate, life expectancy is increased. Lifespan is measured in terms of the number of breaths one takes and not by the number of years one lives. Some mosquitos have a life span of only 6 hours. In 6 hours they completes their birth, growth, maturity and death.</p>
<p>It is said in <em>Shrimad Bhagawatam</em> that the creator Brahma’s one second is equal to 100,000 human years. Brahma’s 100 years is 3,11040,0000,000,00 (31,104 billion) human years. After Brahma’s 100 years of life span, he gets liberated and takes all the liberated souls along with him to <em>Vaikunta </em>(place with no defects) where he will be replaced by another Brahma. Everyone lives for 100 years but on a different scale. We have heard about yogis living for hundreds of years. This is because they knew the art of breathing. The slower we breathe, the longer is our life span. When we are stressed or angry, our breathing rate increases which in turn reduces our life span.</p>
<p>According to the scriptures, when we are relaxed it takes 2 seconds for inhalation and 2 seconds for exhalation. For one cycle of inhalation and exhalation, it takes 4 seconds. In one minute we breathe 15 times. In one hour we breathe 900 times and in one day we breathe 21,600 times. When we breathe 21,600 times, it is 1 day for the body. Instead of taking 4 seconds per cycle, by Pranayama practice if we take 8 seconds, it takes 2 days on the external clock to complete 21,600 breaths, which is one day by our inner clock. Our inner clock (body) may say 100 years, but the outer clock says 200 years. If we take 16 seconds per cycle, for 100 years of the inner clock, the outer clock says 400 years. Instead, if we are under stress and prone to anger, we take 2 seconds per breath cycle, to do 21,600 breaths it takes only 12 hours on the external clock. It may be 100 years for the body, but the outer clock has done only 50 years. In short, the slower we breathe, the longer we live.</p>
<p><em>Pranayama</em> slows down our breathing and reveals the inner light by removing its covering. In <em>kumbhaka</em> (breath retention), the body function goes into hibernation. By doing <em>Pranayama</em> one is able to live one’s full life span without disease. When we breathe slowly, our mind de-stresses itself and gets relaxed. The relaxed mind expands. An expanded mind is creative. Creativity is one of the hallmarks of a true leader. <em>Pranayama</em> makes us lead our life well. When we lead our life well, we also inspire others.</p>
<p>
<strong>Video: </strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3Yui-IEeJgU</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xKcNVWec-cg</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JngAJOjQhoU</p>
<p>
<strong>Hata Yoga and Pranayama</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Hata </em>means force. <em>Hata</em> means determination. <em>Hata</em> means not giving up till the goal is reached. <em>Hata </em>means perseverance. <em>Hata</em> means patience. <em>Hata</em> means endurance – enduring the difficulties in life to achieve the noble goal in life.</p>
<p>To achieve the noble goal in life one needs to be physically healthy, mentally stable and spiritually fit. The weak cannot get the highest as the Mundakopanishad says <em>nayam atma balaheenena labyaha </em>(नायमात्मा <span>बलहीनेन लभ्यः ।)</span><em>. Practice of Hata Yoga helps us to realise our goal by </em><em>awakening the dormant energy in us – called kundalini shakti</em>.</p>
<p>Hata Yoga says that the <em>sadhaka</em>, practioner of yoga perishes by six causes - over eating, over talking, too much of physical labour, observance of unsuitable vows, bad company and unsteadiness.</p>
<p>Yogi succeeds by inculcating six qualities - cheerfulness, perseverance, courage, true knowledge, firm belief in the words of the guru and by abandoning wrong company.</p>
<p>Patanjali says the same in different words in his Yoga Sutra that a student of yoga should follow Yama and Niyama.</p>
<p>There are five qualities in <em>yama</em> which are <em>ahimsa</em> (non injury),<em> </em><em>satya</em> (truthfulness),<em> asteya</em> (non stealing), <em>brahmacharya</em> (self restraint and higher vision in life) and a<em>parigraha</em> (non hoarding).<SPAN class="en"> </span></p>
<p>There are five qualities in <em>niyama</em> which are <em>shoucha</em> (cleanliness),<em> </em><em>santosha </em>(cheerfulness), <em>tapas</em> (austerity), <em>swadhyaya </em>(contemplating on the scriptures) and <em>iswara pranidana</em> (surrender to the Lord).</p>
<p>The above discipline prepares the student for a deeper journey in to yoga.</p>
<p>Doing the asanas makes the yogi firm, free from diseases and laziness. When body is cleansed of impurities, doing asana becomes easier. The gross impurities are removed through Shat Karma Kriyas and subtle impurities are removed through asana and subtler impurities are removed through pranayama and subtlest impurities are removed through <em>mantra japa</em>.</p>
<p>There are six <em>hata yoga kriyas</em>. They are <em>Neti</em> (cleaning the sinus through the nose), <em>Dhauti</em> (cleaning the wind and food pipe), <em>Nauli </em>(churning the stomach muscles),<em> Basti </em>(cleaning the lower and upper intestine), <em>Kapalabhati</em> (cleaning the sinus and head by active exhale and passive inhale) and <em>Tratak</em> (gazing on light).</p>
<p>By doing pranayama, the nadis get purified. When nadis gets purified, the prana goes in to the central nadi called – <em>sushumna nadi.</em> The indication that the prana has started going through the <em>sushumna</em> <em>nadi </em>is that the yogi experiences the bliss within and hears the inner sound.</p>
<p>By the practice of pranayama along with proper diet and proper <em>mudra</em>s and <em>bandhas</em> one is freed from diseases. By wrong practice one develops various diseases like asthma, headache, cough and many more.</p>
<p>Like taming the elephant one should tame the mind by gradually building mastery over one’s breath. Doing pranayama has a calming effect on the mind. Mind has different levels – unconscious mind, conscious mind, sub-conscious mind and super-conscious mind. When pranayama is practiced properly the dynamic, active, restless mind is quietened. When the mind is quietened, the intuition starts working and one experiences the new revelations and one experiences an immense joy. This is called as <em>unmani avasta</em> or <em>asamprajana samadhi</em> or <em>turiya avasta.</em></p>
<p>In the human body there are 72,000 nadis (energy carrying nerves) of which 36,000 are called female nadis (<em>Ida</em>) and 36,000 are called as male nadis (<em>Pingala</em>). Wherever the nadis meet, they form an energy centre called a <em>chakra</em>. Generally, energy does not flow properly in the body because of impurities. This is cleaned by the process of various asanas, pranayams and yoga kriyas.</p>
<p>In Hata yoga, <em>Ha </em>means Sun and<em> Ta</em> means Moon. Hata also means +ve and –ve energy. Hata yoga brings Sun and Moon centres together so that Prana moves through the <em>Sushumna</em> <em>nadi </em>(central nadi). Although we have two nostrils, the breathing usually happens only through one nostril. The left nostril is connected to the right brain. It is called <em>Ida nadi</em> (Moon nadi). Breathing in through the left nostril cools down the body. When the body get heated through emotions, Prana moves through the left nostril <em>(Ida)</em> to cool the body down.</p>
<p>The <em>ida nadi</em> (Moon nadi) nourishes our body. The <em>pingala nadi</em> (Sun nadi) consumes and degenerates the body. Balancing the moon and sun system in the body is pranayama. If Sun is weak in the body, person can go in to depression easily. On the other hand, if moon is weak in the body, person can become hyper active and restless and age quickly. So pranayama balances the Sun and Moon systems in the body.</p>
<p>The right nostril is connected to the left brain. It is called <em>Pingala </em><em>nadi</em> (Sun nadi). Breathing in through the right nostril heats up the body. When the body get cooled down through calm and clear thinking, Prana moves through the right nostril <em>(Pingala Nadi)</em> to warm and energize the body.</p>
<p>This alternate switching happens every 2-3 hours or so. Practicing <em>Pranayama</em> makes the Prana travel through the central <em>Sushumna </em><em>nadi.</em> By bringing the prana to the<em> Sushumna Nadi</em> (bringing sun and moon systems together), our mind will not be disturbed and swing like a pendulum with every passing thought and emotion. This is done through <em>Nasika shuddi</em> (cleaning the nasal passage) and <em>Nadi shuddi</em> (cleaning the nadis) <em>Pranayama</em>.</p>
<p>Hata yoga also means <em>Ida </em>and <em>Pingala</em>. <em>Ha</em> means the sun system which is <em>Pingala</em>. <em>Ta</em> means the moon system which is <em>Ida</em>. <em>Pingala</em> is also referred to as the river <em>Yamun</em>a, and <em>Ida</em> is referred to as the river <em>Ganga</em>. Where Ganga and <em>Yamuna</em> meet, that place is called <em>Prayag</em>, and there the third river <em>Saraswati </em>emerges giving it the name <em>Triveni Sangam</em> – the meeting of three rivers. <em>Sushumna </em><em>nadi</em> is referred to as the river <em>Saraswati</em>. <em>Ida</em> and<em> pingala</em> run through the spinal column like a DNA helix, and wherever they cross the <em>Sushumna nadi</em>, that place is called an energy centre or <em>chakra. Ida</em> and <em>pingala</em> cross each other along the central <em>Sushumna nadi</em> in seven places which are the seven main chakras - <em>Mooladhara, Swadistana, Manipura, Anahata, Vishudda, Ajna </em>and <em>Sahasrara.</em></p>
<p><em>Ida</em> is referred to as feminine and <em>pingala</em> is referred to as masculine in nature. A person with predominant ida nadi is usually heart centered and likely to be a creative person. A person with predominant pingala nadi is more head centered and very rational in approach.</p>
<p>The <em>ida</em> predominant person is very emotional in approach. To discover Self realization we need to have a balanced <em>ida</em> and <em>pingala</em> – well developed in head and heart – only then the well developed philosopher in us comes out. The same message is conveyed in <em>Mahanarayana Upanshad</em> as <em>Hrida maneesha manasabhi klipto </em><em>ye yenam vidura amrutaste bhavanti </em>(हृदा मनीषा मनसाऽभिक्लृप्तो य एनं <span>विदुरमृतास्ते भवन्ति ।)</span>- heart and head (bhakti and jnana) and vairagya will lead to immortality.</p>
<p>We need to be <em>Ardha Naareeswara</em> - half male and half female personality for realization of God. Realization does not happen to one who is only either a head or a heart centered person.</p>
<p>Breathing through alternate nostrils activates the left and right brains. <em>Pranayama</em> activates not only <em>ida</em>, <em>pingala</em> and <em>sushumna </em><em>nadis</em> but also activates the energy centres (chakras) in the body.</p>
<p>There are 8.4 million asanas of which 84 are important. Out of those 84 asanas 4 asanas are important. They are siddasana, padmasana, bhadrasana and simhasana.</p>
<p>
<strong>Video: </strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X_swGCPUDPo</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A5oEycbUYFs</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WfofgG-0GCE</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wEWzSYjAhcc</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jkrHT3U2YZg</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cyxumXMmqgA</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qMpDciuSe9Q</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1NpHre-8yng</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A5GKOVg_eMM</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-QltxoU0MKY</p>
<p>The following are some of the different <em>Pranayama</em> techniques mentioned in Hata Yoga Pradipika and Gheranda Samhita. The postures recommended for practice are <em>Siddasana</em>, <em>Padmasana</em>, <em>Ardha Padmasan</em>a and <em>Vajrasana</em>. Pictures 18 to 21b show these postures. It is highly recommended to learn the pranayama under an adept teacher to avoid any side effects.</p>
<p><em>Hata Yoga Pradipika </em>says that <em>siddasana </em>is best among the asana as it purifies all 72,000 nadis. (HYP, 1-38, 39)</p>
<p>There is no asana like the <em>siddasana, </em>no kumbhaka like <em>kevala</em>, no mudra like <em>khechari </em>and no laya (absorption) like <em>nada</em>. (HYP, 1-43)</p>
<p>
<strong>Video: </strong>
</p>
<p>www.youtube.com/watch?v=6vI4aFa3GKw</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eADX3bidZOA</p>
<p><em>Hata Yoga Pradipika</em> says <em>Padmasana </em>destroys all diseases.</p>
<p>
<strong>Video: </strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eADX3bidZOA</p>
<p><em>Vajrasana</em> helps in improving the digestion.</p>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eADX3bidZOA</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<strong>1. Nadi Shodana Pranayama</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p><em>Shodana</em> means purifying. Nadi Shodana <em>Pranayama</em> is the technique of purifying the nadis.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>Purifies the nadis. As nadis are purified, the energy level in the body increases and the breathing deepens. When the nadis are cleansed, we are able to hear the <em>anahata</em> sound (inner sound). This harmonises the blood pressure which in turn relaxes the mind. The relaxed mind expands and intuition dawns in an expanded mind. This leads to the opening up of <em>Vijnanamaya kosha.</em> In <em>Vijananmaya kosha</em> intuition starts working and we get flashes of inspiration which leads us to the <em>anandamaya kosha.</em> When the mind is expanded we are able to tap into our bliss within.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in <em>Siddasana</em>, <em>Padmasana</em> (lotus posture), <em>Ardha </em><em>Padmasana</em> (half lotus posture) or <em>Vajrasana</em> (Pictures 18 - 21b)</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>If you cannot sit on the floor you can sit on a chair</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold the chin up</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Use only your thumb and ring finger of the right hand to close the right and left nostrils</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>The thumb indicates the fire element and this is used to close the right nostril</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>The right nostril represents <em>Surya </em>(Sun)<em> nadi (pingala nadi)</em></dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>The ring finger represents the earth element and this is used to close the left nostril</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>The left nostril represents <em>Chandra</em> (Moon) <em>nadi</em> <em>(ida nadi)</em></dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bend the fore and middle fingers of your right hand into <em>vayu </em><em>shoonya mudra</em></dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring the left thumb and left index finger together in <em>chin </em><em>mudra</em> on your left knee</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>With the right thumb close the right nostril and inhale through the left nostril to the count of 10</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Feel the expansion in the abdomen and lungs as you inhale</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>With the right ring finger close the left nostril, release the right thumb and exhale through the right nostril to the count of 15</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Feel the contraction in the chest and stomach as you exhale</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Inhale through the right nostril to the count of 10 keeping the left nostril closed with the right ring finger </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Exhale through the left nostril for the count of 15 keeping the right nostril closed using the thumb</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>This is one round</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Do 10 rounds of alternate nostril breathing and relax</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Slowly increase the duration to 15 minutes or longer and feel the serenity in the mind</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Refer to picture 22.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PzkvMW5D17M</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hiEoWIwt6s8</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g1FlrVsiW_k</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hczg6XHCoiY</p>
<p>
<strong>2. Viloma Pranayama</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Anuloma </em>means smooth inhalation and exhalation. Viloma means obstructed inhalation and exhalation.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>Lung capacity increases, One gets control over the breath and this helps in managing the anger, stress and depression. People with blood pressure problem and asthma will find this beneficial.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in <em>Siddasana</em>, <em>Padmasana</em> (lotus posture), <em>Ardha </em><em>Padmasana</em> (half lotus posture) or <em>Vajrasana</em> (Pictures 18 - 21b)</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>If you cannot sit on the floor you can sit on a chair</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold the chin up</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Use only your thumb and ring finger to close the right and left nostrils</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>The thumb indicates the fire element and this is used to close the right nostril</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>The right nostril represents <em>Surya </em>(Sun)<em> nadi (pingala nadi)</em></dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>The ring finger represents the earth element and this is used to close the left nostril</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>The left nostril represents <em>Chandra</em> (Moon) <em>nadi</em> <em>(ida nadi)</em></dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bend the fore and middle fingers of your right hand into <em>vayu </em><em>shoonya mudra</em></dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring the left thumb and left index finger together in <em>chin </em><em>mudra</em> on your left knee</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>With the right thumb close the right nostril and inhale through the left nostril to the count of 5 and hold the breath for the count of 5. Inhale again for the count of 5 and hold the breath for the count of 5. Inhale again for the count of 5 and hold the breath for 5 counts</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Feel the expansion in the abdomen and lungs as you inhale</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>With the right ring finger close the left nostril and exhale through the right nostril to the count of 5 and hold the breath for the count of 5. Exhale again for the count of 5 and hold the breath for the count of 5. Exhale again for the count of 5 and hold the breath for the count of 5</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Feel the contraction in the chest and stomach as you exhale</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Inhale through the right nostril to the count of 5 and hold the breath for the count of 5. Inhale again for the count of 5 and hold the breath for the count of 5. Inhale again for the count of 5 and hold the breath for 5 counts</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Exhale through the left nostril to the count of 5 and hold the breath for the count of 5. Exhale again for the count of 5 and hold the breath for the count of 5. Exhale again for the count of 5 and hold the breath for the count of 5</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>This is one round</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Do 10 rounds of alternate nostril breathing and relax</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Slowly increase the duration to 15 minutes or longer and feel the serenity in the mind. Refer to Picture 22.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Video: </strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CqiIfnoTcWQ</p>
<p><strong>3. Bhramari Pranayama Type </strong>1</p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Bhramari</em> means bumble bee.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This is a <em>laghu</em> (light) <em>Pranayama</em>. It is beneficial for people with blocked ears and insomnia problem. It activates the thyroid and parathyroid glands, strengthens the heart, removes angina pain, removes ear pain, improves hearing, reduces blood pressure, regulates heartbeat and strengthens the bones. It helps in hearing the Anahata nada (the inner sound) and helps in meditation.</p>
<p><strong>Type </strong>1<strong>: </strong>This <em>Pranayama</em> is performed with the sound of the male bumble bee.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in <em>Siddasana</em>, <em>Padmasana</em>, <em>Ardha Padmasana</em> or <em>Vajrasana</em> as shown in (Pictures 18 - 21b) </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>If you cannot sit on the floor you can sit on a chair</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold the chin up</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring your thumb and middle finger together into <em>akasha </em><em>mudra</em> as shown in picture 36</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Akasha mudra strengthens the heart muscles and bones, improves hearing, reduces blood pressure and regulates the heartbeat</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Raise your hands so that the elbows are parallel to the ground and close both ears with your index fingers</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Inhale deeply and as you exhale say the three syllable OM aloud “A”, “U,” and “M”</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Say ‘A’ (sounds like <em>ahhh</em>) for the count of 5, ‘U’ (sounds like <em>ooo</em>) for the count of 10 and ‘M’ (sounds like <em>mmm</em>) with lips together for the count of 15</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>As you are saying ‘M’, gently move your index fingers in and out of the ears and focus on the humming sound</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Pause for 10 seconds and try to hear the inner sound – <em>anahata</em> sound</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Inhale and repeat the same for 5 minutes and relax. Refer to picture 23.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Caution: </strong>
</p>
<p>Keep the nails on your index fingers short.</p>
<p>
<strong>Video: </strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fwXP-DmL4Aw</p>
<p>4<strong>. Bhramari Pranayama Type </strong>2</p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p>This Pranayama is a combination of the male and female bumble bee sound. This type of Bhramari pranayama is more intense than <em>Bhramari Pranayama Type </em>1.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This is a <em>laghu</em> (light) <em>Pranayama </em>which improves the hearing. It is beneficial for people with blocked ears and insomnia problem. It activates the thyroid and parathyroid glands, strengthens the heart, removes angina pain, removes ear pain, reduces blood pressure, regulates heartbeat and strengthens the bones. It helps in hearing the <em>anahata nada</em> (the inner sound) and helps in meditation.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in <em>Siddasana</em>, <em>Padmasana</em>, <em>Ardha Padmasana</em> or <em>Vajrasana</em> (Pictures 18 - 21b)</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>If you cannot sit on the floor you can sit on a chair</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold the chin up</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring your thumb and middle finger together into <em>akasha </em><em>mudra</em> as shown in the picture 36</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Akasha mudra strengthens the heart muscles and bones, improves hearing, reduces blood pressure and regulates the heart beat</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Raise your hands so that the elbows are parallel to the ground and close both ears with your index fingers</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>As you inhale, throttle the throat muscles and make the female <em>Bhramari sound</em> (female bumble bee) </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>As you exhale say the three syllable OM aloud “A”, “U,” and “M”</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Say ‘A’ (sounds like <em>ahhh</em>) for the count of 5, ‘U’ (sounds like <em>ooo</em>) for the count of 10 and ‘M’ (sounds like <em>mmm</em>) with lips together for the count of 15</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>As you are saying ‘M’, gently move your index fingers in and out of the ears and focus on the humming sound</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Pause for 10 seconds and try to hear the inner sound – <em>anahata</em> sound</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Inhale and repeat the same for 5 minutes and relax. Refer to picture 23.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong> Caution: </strong>
</p>
<p>Keep the nails on your index fingers short.</p>
<p>
<strong>Video: </strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1r1mK6v3P1I</p>
<p>
<strong>Pranayama for hot and cold days:</strong>
</p>
<p>Yogis use the pranayama techniques to keep themselves cool on the hot days and warm during the cold days. This will enable them to turn on the internal air conditioner. By doing the <em>Chandra loma</em> pranayama, i.e. inhaling through the left nostril and exhaling through the right, <em>ida nadi gets </em>activated, generating a cooling effect on the body.</p>
<p>By doing the <em>Surya loma</em> pranayama, ie. Inhaling through the right nostril and exhaling through the left, <em>pingala nadi gets </em>activated and this has a heating effect on the body.</p>
<p>Body has its own thermostat. Generally, the <em>ida nadi</em> is active for about 2-3 hours and then it switches over to the <em>pingala nadi</em> for</p>
<p>7. <strong>Sheetali Pranayama</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Sheeta </em>means cool.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This is a <em>laghu</em> (light) <em>Pranayama</em> and is beneficial on hot days. It cools the body, relaxes the mind, reduces stress and increases body immunity, health and the glow on the face. People with insomnia will find this <em>pranayama</em> beneficial. This destroys the diseases of stomach and spleen, bile problem, hunger and thirst.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in <em>Siddasana, Padmasana, Ardha Padmasana </em>or<em> </em><em>Vajrasana</em> (Pictures 18 - 21b)</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>If you cannot sit on the floor you can sit on a chair</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold the chin up</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Open your mouth slightly and shape your tongue like a tube as shown in Picture 26 above and draw the air in through this tube</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Drawing the air through the tongue humidifies and cools the air</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Close your mouth, swallow the air and exhale through your nostrils</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Repeat this for 5 minutes and relax. Refer to picture 26.</dd>
</dl>
<p>8. <strong>Sheetakari Pranayama</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Sheetakari</em> means cooling with a hissing sound.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This is a <em>laghu </em>(light) <em>Pranayama </em>and is beneficial on hot days. It cools the body, relaxes the mind, reduces stress and increases body immunity, health and the glow on the face. It helps to overcome hunger and thirst. People with insomnia will find this <em>pranayama</em> beneficial.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in <em>Siddasana</em>, <em>Padmasana</em>, <em>Ardha Padmasana</em> or <em>Vajrasana</em> (Pictures 18 - 21b)</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>If you cannot sit on the floor you can sit on a chair </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold the chin up</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Open your mouth slightly, bring your jaws together and clench your teeth lightly as shown below</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Draw the air in through the teeth</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Drawing the air in through the teeth expands the air quickly </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Close your mouth, swallow the air and exhale through your nostrils</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Repeat this for 5 minutes and relax. Refer to picture 27.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mGqZMd7oHL0</p>
<p>9<strong>. Bastrika Pranayama Type </strong>1</p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Basti</em> means bladder region. <em>Bastrika</em> means bellows. The bladder region moves in and out as in the case of a bellow.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>This<em> Pranayama</em> strengthens the bladder region, activates the <em>manipura chakra</em> and oxygenates the whole body. It increases the body’s Prana level and lung capacity. It helps people with breathing disorders such as asthma, purifies the <em>nadis</em>, heats up the body and helps to burn fat. It strengthens and balances the nervous system and relaxes the mind.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in <em>Siddasana, Padmasana, Ardha Padmasana </em>or<em> </em><em>Vajrasana</em> (Pictures 18 - 21b)</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>If you cannot sit on the floor you can sit on a chair</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold the chin up</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Place your hands on your knees</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Lean forward slightly to keep your back straight</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Inhale and exhale rapidly</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>The duration of the inhalation and exhalation should be the same</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>When you inhale abdomen goes out chest expands and when you exhale chest contracts and stomach goes in</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Do not bend your neck or back</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Do this for one minute and relax</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Repeat 3 times</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Do not breathe too hard and make sure your shoulders are steady.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong> Caution: </strong>
</p>
<p>Stop doing this Pranayama if you feel tired or giddy. This is not recommended for people with heart problems or high blood pressure. Doing <em>Bastrika</em> too long in one stretch may over strain or damage the internal organs. Seek expert advice before doing <em>Bastrika</em>. First timers, please do this <em>Pranayama</em> under supervision.</p>
<p>
<strong>Video: </strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hczg6XHCoiY</p>
<p>10<strong>. Bastrika Pranayama Type </strong>2</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This <em>Pranayama </em>is more intense than <em>Bastrika Pranayama </em>Type 1. It strengthens the bladder region, activates the Manipura chakra, and oxygenates the whole body. It increases the body’s Prana level and lung capacity. It helps people with breathing disorders such as asthma, purifies the <em>nadis</em>, heats up the body and helps to burn fat. It strengthens and balances the nervous system, opens up the rib cage and relaxes the mind.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in <em>Siddasana, Padmasana, </em><em>Ardha Padmasana </em>or<em> Vajrasana</em> (Pictures 18 - 21b)</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>If you cannot sit on the floor you can sit on a chair</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold the chin up</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Cup your fingers on your shoulders with the elbows pointing down. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Inhale and exhale deeply and rapidly</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>The duration of the inhalation and exhalation should be the same</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>When you inhale the abdomen goes out and the chest expands. When you exhale the chest contracts and the stomach is pushed in</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Do not bend your neck or back</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Perform <em>Bastrika</em> for one minute</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Now keeping the fingers cupped on the shoulders, raise your elbows across so that the bent arms are parallel to the ground</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Perform <em>Bastrika</em> in this position for one minute</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Now keeping the fingers cupped on the shoulders, point your elbows towards the ceiling so that the bent forearms are pressing lightly against the sides of your head</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Perform <em>Bastrika</em> in this position for one minute and relax</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Repeat 3 times</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Do not breathe too hard.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong> Caution: </strong>
</p>
<p>Stop doing this pranayama if you feel tired or giddy. This is not recommended for people with heart problems or high blood pressure. Doing <em>Bastrika</em> too long in one stretch may over strain or damage the internal organs. Seek expert advice before doing <em>Bastrika</em>. First timers, please do under supervision.</p>
<p>Refer to Pictures 28, 29 and 30.</p>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fwXP-DmL4Aw</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HdmXzQK-m8g</p>
<p>11<strong>. Kapalabhati</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This pranayama increases radiance in the face, activates the brain, improves intelligence, strengthens and balances the nervous system, relaxes the mind and cleanses the sinus. It increases the lung capacity which brings relief to people with breathing disorder such as asthma, purifies the nadis, heats the body and helps burn the fat.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in <em>Siddasana</em>, <em>Padmasana</em>, <em>Ardha Padmasana</em> or <em>Vajrasana</em> (Pictures 18 - 21b)</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>If you cannot sit on the floor sit on a chair</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold your chin up</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Place your palms on your knees</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Lean slightly forward to keep your spine erect</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Now simply push the air out through the nostrils while simultaneously pulling the stomach in</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Do not inhale actively</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd><em>Kapalabhati</em> is active exhalation with passive inhalation</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Do <em>Kapalabhati</em> for a minute and relax</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Repeat 3 times</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Do not breathe too hard and ensure that your shoulders are steady.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong> Caution</strong>
</p>
<p>Stop doing this pranayama if you feel tired or giddy. This is not recommended for people with heart problems or high blood pressure. Doing <em>Kapalabhati</em> for too long in one stretch may strain or injure the internal organs. Please seek expert advice before doing <em>Kalapabhati</em>. First timers, please do this pranayama under supervision.</p>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qZPiq5ZDWyQ</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=auib0-lwTnU</p>
<p>12.<strong> Ujjayi Pranayama</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Ujjayi </em>means victorious and happy.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This pranayama relaxes the mind and body and lowers blood pressure. It helps people with insomnia and helps in meditation. It increases the energy level in the body by opening up the lungs and aerating the body. This removes disorders in the throat caused by phlegm and stimulates the digestive fire in the body.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in <em>Siddasana, Padmasana, Ardha Padmasana </em>or<em> </em><em>Vajrasana</em> (Pictures 18 - 21b)</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>If you cannot sit on the floor you can sit on a chair</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold the chin up</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring the thumb and index fingers together in <em>chin mudra</em> as shown in the picture 32<strong> </strong>and place your hands on the knees </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Quickly inhale through both the nostrils and feel the expansion in the chest</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Exhale slowly through<em> ida</em> (left), bring the chin close to the collarbone and breathe out as slowly as you can with a snoring sound</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold the breath out (<em>bahya</em> <em>kumbhaka</em> ) as long as you can</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Inhale quickly again with your chin up</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Repeat this for 5 minutes and relax. </dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong> Caution: </strong>
</p>
<p>Stop doing this pranayama if you feel tired or giddy. People with either low or high blood pressure should do this pranayama with caution.</p>
<p>13<strong>. Sandya Vandana Pranayama</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p>Along with Gayatri Mantra initiation, this pranayama is also taught to <em>vatu</em> (competent student) at the time of <em>upanayana</em>.</p>
<p>To know the <em>Upanishads </em>(higher knowledge), one has to be initiated into <em>upanayana</em> (opening the inner eye) by a <em>upadyaya</em> (a competent teacher). To understand the Upanishad one has to revel in higher things (upavasa).</p>
<p>This pranayama mantra comes in Mahanarayana Upanishad which is a part of Taitareya Upanishad and it is as follows:</p>
<p><em>Om bhuhu Om bhuvaha Om Suvaha Om Mahaha Om Janaha </em><em>Om Tapaha Om Satyam Om Tat Savitur Vareyanm Bhargo </em><em>Dhevasya Dhimahi Dhiyoyonah Parchodayat, Om apo jyoti </em><em>raso amrutam Brahma bhurbhuvaswarom</em> (ॐ भूः ॐ भुवः ॐ सुवः <span>ॐ महः ॐ जनः ॐ तपः ॐ सत्यं ॐ तत्सवितुर्वरेण्यं भर्गो देवस्य धीमहि धियो यो नः </span>प्रचोदयात् । ॐ आपो ज्योती रसोऽमृतं ब्रह्म भूर्भुवःस्वरोम् ।।)</p>
<p>This mantra has 10 Omkaras, talks about seven higher levels of existence, bhu, buva, swaha, mahaha, janaha, Tapaha and satya lokas, one Gayatri Mantra and at the end a prayer to the all-pervading Lord to protect our sadhana.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This pranayama oxygenates the whole body and removes the carbon di-oxide and other toxins from the body completely. Energies the whole body and enhances the lung capacity. People with respiratory and stress related problem will find this useful. By regular practice of this Sandya Vandana Pranayama, glow in the face increases.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in <em>Siddasana, Padmasana, Ardha Padmasana </em>or<em> </em><em>Vajrasana</em> (Pictures 18 - 21b)</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>If you cannot sit on the floor you can sit on a chair</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold the chin up</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring the left hand index finger to the base of the thumb in to <em>dharana</em> mudra</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bend your right hand index and two middle fingers and bring them to the base of the right thumb</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Use right hand thumb for closing the right nostril and ring finger for closing the left nostril</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Inhale through the left nostril and fill up your lungs completely</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Close both nostrils with right hand thumb and ring and little finger and hold the breath inside (<em>antar kumbaka)</em> and repeat the mantra <em>Om bhuhu Om bhuvaha Om Suvaha </em><em>Om Mahaha Om Janaha Om Tapaha Om Satyam Om Tat </em><em>Savitur Vareyanm Bhargo Dhevasya Dhimahi Dhiyoyonah </em></dd>
</dl>
<p>Picture 18: Siddasana</p>
<p>Picture 19: Padmasana</p>
<p>Picture 20: Ardha Padmasana</p>
<p>Picture 21a:Vajrasana – front</p>
<p>Picture 21b:Vajrasana – back</p>
<p>Picture 22:Nadi shodana Pranayama</p>
<p>Picture 23 :Bhramari Pranayamawith sitting in SiddasanaType 1 and Type 2</p>
<p>Picture 26: Sheetali Pranayama</p>
<p>Picture : Sheetakari Pranayama</p>
<p>Picture 28:Bhastrika Pranayama Type 2</p>
<p>Picture 29:Bhastrika Pranayama Type 2</p>
<p>Picture 30:Bhastrika Pranayama Type 2</p>
<p>Picture 31: Dharana Mudra</p>
<p>53</p>
<p>Pranayama</p>
<p>next 2-3 hours. Sometime, the body thermostat stops working and only <em>ida </em>or <em>pigala nadi</em> will be active for a long period of time. This results in one feeling cold or hot for a long period of time. We can overcome this problem by the following pranayama techniques.</p>
<p>
<strong>5. Chandra Loma Pranayama</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p>This pranayama is for activating the ida nadi. This activates the moon centre in the body. This helps in cooling the body down.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in a comfortable position with back neck and head in one line</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Make the left palm into a fist and put it under the right arm pit as shown in picture 24a</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bend your right hand's index and middle fingers </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Close the right nostril with the thumb and inhale through the left nostril as shown in picture 24b</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>With right ring finger close the left nostril and exhale through the right nostril</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Inhale through the left nostril and exhale through the right nostril as above</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Refer to the pictures above.</dd>
</dl>
<p>Picture 24a</p>
<p>Picture 24b</p>
<p>Chandra Loma Pranayama</p>
<p>Surya Namaskara – <em>with</em> Pranayama, Mudras & Bandha and Accupressure</p>
<p>67</p>
<p>66</p>
<p>Mudra and Bandha</p>
<p>Mudra means symbol. Mudra means insignia. Mudra means commitment. Sumudra means full commitment. That is why God is called as Samudra-as he has full commitment in everything and never does anything half-heartedly .</p>
<p>
<strong>Mudra and Bandha</strong>
</p>
<p>Mudra means symbol. Mudra means insignia. Mudra means commitment. Samudra means full commitment. That is why God is called as Samudra - as He has full commitment in everything and never does anything half-heartedly.</p>
<p>According to Gheranda Samhita, Mudras and Bandhas are done to steady the body. Mudras and Bandhas help in preventing the dissipation of energy, and help in redirecting the energy. Bandhas are the lock and mudras are the lock over a lock.</p>
<p>Hata Yoga Pradipika talks about Maha Mudra, Maha Bandha, Maha Vedha, Jalandhar Bandha, Uddyan Bandha, Moola Bandha, Viparta Karini Mudra, Khechari Mudra, Aswini Mudra, Vrajoli Mudra, Shambhavi Mudra and Shan Mukhi Mudra.</p>
<p><em>Ha</em> means sun,<em> Ta </em>means moon. The seat of moon centre is the <em>sahasrara chakra,</em> and the seat of sun system is the <em>manipura </em><em>chakra</em> at the navel. Our active life continues as long as the nectar remains in the <em>sahasrara chakra</em> at the crown. Just like pressing the accelerator in the car draws more fuel, when we breathe rapidly, we draw more nectar from the <em>sahasrara chakra</em> which flows into the <em>manipura chakra</em> where it gets consumed. Bandhas like Jalandhara bandha, Kriyas like Vasudeva Kriya, Viparita Karani, asanas such as Shirasasana, Sarvangasana, Vrischikasana etc. reduce the consumption of the nectar (<em>amruta</em>) at <em>Manipura chakra</em> and preserve the body’s vitality.</p>
<p>By manipulating our prana or vital energy, we can direct it towards better health, well being and personal transformation.</p>
<p>Mudra is defined as <em>Mudham Dadaati Devaanam Dravayasya </em><em>Asuraarapi</em> – ‘That by which the divine beings get happiness and the negative forces and diseases are driven away’. Mudras are used in <em>Tantra puja</em>.</p>
<p>Mudras are classified in to:</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>
<strong>Kaya Mudra</strong>
<em>mudra, Manduki Mudra etc)</em>
</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>
<strong>Mana Mudra </strong>
<em>(mudra through the senses on the face- using </em>
<em>lips, eyes, nose, ear, tongue – Shambhavi, Kaki, Akashi, Nasika </em>
<em>Dristi, Shanmukhi, Khechari)</em>
</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>
<strong>Bandha</strong>
<em> (Jaalandhar, Uddiyan, Moola and Maha)</em>
</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>
<strong>Adhara Mudra </strong>
<em>(supporting mudras - Aswini, Vrajoli etc)</em>
</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>
<strong>Hasta Mudra</strong>
<em> (mudras through hands - balance the</em>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd><em>Mahabhootas</em> like fire, water, air, earth and ether elements and </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HdmXzQK-m8g</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ChWXCosOlTU</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NQK3xXXi3lw</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cteAAj42bVg</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r9P3BSfFh0U</p>
<p>
<strong>Hasta Mudra (hand mudra)</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Dhanvantari Mantra (Healing mantra):</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em>Om Ayam me hasto Bhagavan ayam me bhagavattaraha </em>
</p>
<p>
<em>Ayam me viswa bheshajaha ayam Shivabhi marshanaha</em>
</p>
<p>ॐ अयं मे हस्तो भगवानयं मे भगवत्तरः । अयं मे विश्ववेदसोऽयं शिवाऽऽभिमर्शनः ।</p>
<p><strong>The broad meaning of this mantra:</strong> “The Supreme Lord resides in my palms as the greatest healer. All the medicinal herbs of this world are in my palms. By His Grace, through these palms I heal myself and I will be an instrument in healing others.”</p>
<p>The body is made up of 5 elements – Earth, Water, Fire, Air and Ether. When these five elements are not in balance we get various physical and psychological ailments. The energy from the body radiates out mainly through the tip of the nose, lips, fingertips and toes. When the thumb is brought in contact with the other fingers, energy is directed back to vitalize various parts of our body. This is called a <em>circuit bypass</em>. Mudras and bandhas go hand in hand. Bandhas help in locking in the energy, whereas mudras help in redirecting the energy.</p>
<p>Mudras are the expression of our inner feeling. In the Tantra shastra, Mudra is defined as ‘<em>the one which gives happiness</em>.’ Mudras form a part of yoga and are together referred to as <em>Yoga Mudra</em>. Mudras done using hands are called <em>Hasta Mudra.</em> Indian classical dances such as <em>Bharata Natyam, Yakshagana, Mohini Aattam, Kathakali, </em><em>Kuchupudi, Oddissi</em> make use of mudras to express their art forms. In the temples deities show different mudras. Of those the most well-known mudra is the <em>abhaya</em> mudra (reassuring mudra). In Tirupathi, Balaji’s statue depicts that ‘if you surrender to my feet, your problems are knee deep - and you can easily walk through them.’</p>
<p>The five fingers represent the five elements (tatvas):</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Thumb: Fire <em>(agni)</em></dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Index Finger: Air <em>(vayu)</em></dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Middle finger: Space <em>(akasha)</em></dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Ring Finger: Earth <em>(pritvi)</em></dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Small finger: Water <em>(jala)</em></dd>
</dl>
<p>Fire is the most important of the five elements. When the fire element becomes weak in the body, various ailments come to the body. Through the practice of Mudras the fire element (thumb) is joined with the other elements (other fingers) to vitalize those elements also.</p>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WbXDarhzGpU</p>
<p>1<strong>. Chin Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra improves concentration, memory and decision making ability. It reduces laziness, opens up the whole lung and is beneficial for people experiencing frequent headaches and sleeplessness.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd> Place the back of your palms on your knees and join the tip of the thumb and forefinger together. The other fingers are left relaxed. Refer to picture 32.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TX116N5W0yE</p>
<p>2<strong>. Chinmaya Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Chinmaya</em> means bliss.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra closes the lower lungs and activates the middle and upper parts of the lungs.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Place the back of your palms on your knees and join the tip of the thumb and index finger together. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Curl the other three fingers into the palm as shown in picture 33.</dd>
</dl>
<p>3<strong>. Adi Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Adi</em> means original, ancient.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra closes the middle and lower lungs and activates the upper chest breathing - clavicular breathing.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Place the back of your palms on your knees and wrap your fingers around the thumb to make a fist as shown in the picture 34.</dd>
</dl>
<p>4<strong>. Jnana Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Jnana </em>means knowledge. A teacher while imparting the knowledge uses this mudra and students should receive the knowledge sitting in chin mudra. The spiritual significance of this mudra is given in Srimad Bhagawatam. Thumb indicates Supreme Lord.</p>
<p>Index finger indicates <em>jiva </em>(individual soul). Other 3 fingers indicates <em>avidya</em> (ignorance), <em>kama</em> (passion) and <em>karma </em>(<em>sakama karma</em> - desire prompted action). When <em>jiva</em> (index finger) moves away from <em>avidya, kama</em> and <em>karma</em> and surrenders to Supreme Lord (thumb), <em>jnana mudra</em> happens. If <em>jiva </em>does not surrender, soul suffers in the company of <em>avidya, kama</em> and <em>karma.</em></p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra improves concentration, memory and decision making ability and energises the pituitary and pineal glands. It reduces laziness, opens up the whole lung and is beneficial for people experiencing frequent headaches and sleeplessness. This mudra can be done at any time and place.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold the palms up and join the tips of the thumb and index finger together.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep the other fingers straight as shown in the picture 35.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yn0oHZRmyJk</p>
<p>5<strong>. Akasha Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Akasha</em> means space.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra balances the space inside the body, strengthens the heart muscles, strengthens the bones and improves the hearing. In meditation the Japa Mala rests on the middle finger and this strengthens the heart muscles.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Join the tips of the thumb and the middle finger together. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep the other fingers straight as shown in the picture 36.</dd>
</dl>
<p>6<strong>. Pritvi Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Pritvi</em> means earth element.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra helps to make the body weight proportional to the height. It makes the mind calm and peaceful, removes lethargicness, regulates the bowel movement and improves the blood circulation.</p>
<p>In our body the flesh, bones, hair, veins and skin are made of the earth element.</p>
<p>Respectively<em> Sabda </em>(sound), <em>Rupa </em>(form), <em>Rasa </em>(Taste), <em>Gandha </em>(smell), <em>Sparsha</em> (touch) form the earth elements. Accordingly this mudra harmonises all the <em>jnanedriyas</em> (organs of knowledge).</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Join the tips of the thumb and ring finger. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep the other fingers straight as shown in the picture 37.</dd>
</dl>
<p>7<strong>. Varuna Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Varuna</em> is the deity presiding over water element.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra balances the water content in the body and improves the blood circulation. It is particularly good for people with dry skin, dry cough, burning eyes and skin diseases The unconscious will regain consciousness immediately if the tips of their thumb and little finger are joined together. The health improves significantly by doing the above four mudras- Jnana, Akasha, Pritvi and Varuna mudras for a duration of 15 minutes each followed by Prana Mudra (described below, picture 41).</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Join the tips of the thumb and little fingers. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep the other fingers straight as shown in picture 38.</dd>
</dl>
<p>8<strong>. Vyana Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Vyana</em> means circulation.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This is a very good mudra to control the blood pressure, improve blood circulation and reduce fatigue and insomnia problems.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Join the tips of the thumb with the first and middle fingers. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep the other fingers straight without bending as shown in picture 39.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Prana Mudra must be done following this mudra to improve the effectiveness of this mudra.</dd>
</dl>
<p>9<strong>. Apana Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Apana</em> means downward flowing energy.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra improves digestion, excretion, hearing and eyesight. It is beneficial for people with diabetes and is a quick remedy for stomach ache and tooth ache.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Join the tips of the thumb with the middle and ring fingers. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep the other fingers straight as shown in picture 40</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Prana Mudra must be done following this mudra to improve the effectiveness of this mudra.</dd>
</dl>
<p>10<strong>. Prana Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Prana</em> means upward flowing energy, the vital force explained above in the Pranayama section.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra vitalizes and invigorates the whole body. It improves the eyesight and the healing power in the body. It is good for people with pain, numbness and muscle cramps in the legs.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Join the tips of the thumb with the ring and the little finger and keep the other fingers erect. </dd>
</dl>
<p>11<strong>. Vayu Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Vayu</em> means air.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This is particularly beneficial for people with vata dosha (air) conditions – like, arthritis, gas problem, body ache and bloating stomach. It improves the concentration and is beneficial when done before meditation. This mudra harmonizes all the 5 U<em>papranas</em>: <em>Naga </em>(belching), <em>Kurma </em>(blinking), <em>Krikala </em>(sneezing), <em>Devadatta</em> (yawning), <em>Danajaya</em> (gives the boost of energy in a fight or flee situation).</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bend the index finger to the base of the thumb and place the thumb over it. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep the other fingers erect. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
</dl>
<p>12<strong>. Shoonya Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Shoonya</em> means empty, space.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra is beneficial for people with vertigo, ear pain, speech problem and migraine.</p>
<p>It reduces stammering and pain in the ear and improves hearing and clarity in speech. When there is high <em>akasha tatva</em> (ether element) in the body it will result in a knocking sound or a blocked feeling in the ears. This condition can be cured by reducing the akasha tatva through this mudra.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bend the middle finger to the base of the thumb and place the thumb over it. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep the other fingers erect. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Refer to picture 43.</dd>
</dl>
<p>13<strong>. Surya Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p><em>Sury</em>a means sun.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra energises the nerves, increases the body heat, reduces body fat, and gives relief from phlegm (kapha dosha), asthma, pneumonia, sinus and breathing difficulty. It reduces the <em>pritvi tatva</em> (earth element) in the body. Performing the <em>vayu</em>, <em>akasha</em> and <em>surya</em> mudra vitalizes the pituitary and pineal glands in the body.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>This mudra should be done while walking.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bend the ring finger to the base of the thumb and place the thumb above the ring finger. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep the other fingers erect as shown in picture 44. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>After performing the Surya mudra, do the <em>Linga mudra</em> (described in picture 46) for 7-8 minutes.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong> Caution: </strong>
</p>
<p>Sick persons should avoid doing this mudra.</p>
<p>14<strong>. Jalodhara Nashaka Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Jalodhara Nashaka </em>means<em> </em>removing the excess water from the bladder region.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra removes excess water from the stomach region. It reduces phlegm, cold, sore throat, saliva, runny nose, tears, diarrhoea and excess urination and discharge during women’s monthly cycle.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bend the small finger to the base of the thumb. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Place the thumb above the small finger. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep the other fingers erect. Refer to picture 45.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
</dl>
<p>15<strong>. Linga Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Linga</em> means one which covers the Truth. <em>Linga </em>also represents Lord Vishnu, Lord Shiva and Goddess Durga. <em>Linga</em> also means the idol we use for worship.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra improves the performance of hands, throat, neck, heart, pituitary and thyroid glands. It warms up the body quickly, removes cough, sinus, cold, pneumonia, asthma and tuberculosis, reduces the body fat and is beneficial for people working in air-conditioned offices. It is beneficial for women having menstrual problems. Doing this mudra after Surya Mudra reduces the body weight and increases vitality in Men.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Lock the fingers of both the hands with only one of the thumb sticking out as shown in picture 46.</dd>
</dl>
<p>16<strong>. Shanka Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Shanka</em> means conch.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra purifies the nadis, cools the body, improves hearing, digestion and functioning of the pituitary, pineal and thyroid glands, removes tonsil problems and is good for the functioning of the heart, intestines and kidneys. Practice of this mudra makes the voice smooth and soft like the sound of a conch and is beneficial for people with dust allergy.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring the left hand thumb to the base of the right thumb and wrap the other fingers of right hand around the left thumb. Join the tip of right thumb to the tips of left hand fingers. Refer to picture 47 and 55.</dd>
</dl>
<p>17<strong>. Sahaja Shanka Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Sahaja Shaka</em> means natural conch.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>According to the yoga shastra, this mudra energises 10 major nadis and invigorates the whole body. The 10 nadis are; <em>Ida, Pingala, Sushumna, Gandhari, </em><em>Hastijihva, Poosha, Yashasvini, </em><em>Alambhushaa, Kohoo </em>and<em> Shankhini</em>. It is good for people with piles related issues. With the practice of this mudra the voice becomes smooth and soft and one is able to perceive subtle things in life.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring the thumbs together and wrap the fingers of both hands together as shown in the picture below.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Refer to picture 48.</dd>
</dl>
<p>18<strong>. Aditi Mudra </strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Aditi</em> is the mother of <em>Dwadasha Adityas</em>.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>The body temperature rises and the digestive fire increases by bringing the <em>fire element</em> (thumb) to the base of <em>earth element </em>(ring finger). This mudra helps in curing the problem of continuous sneezing in the mornings. People with hay fever problems will find relief through this mudra.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring the tip of the thumb to the base of the ring finger. Refer to picture 49.</dd>
</dl>
<p>19<strong>. Surabhi Mudra / Denu Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Surabhi</em> is the wish yielding cow which emerged during the churning of ocean by the divine and demonic forces.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>When the little finger (<em>jala tatva</em>) joins the ring finger (<em>pritvi tatva</em>), <em>pitta dosha</em> is removed. When the middle finger (<em>akasha </em><em>tatva</em>) joins the index finger (<em>vayu tatva</em>) <em>vata dhosha</em> is removed. When the two thumbs are separated (<em>agni tatva</em>), <em>kapha </em><em>dosha</em> is removed.</p>
<p>In this position, if we bring both thumbs to the base of little fingers, body get cooled very quickly. This is called<em> Jala Surabhi. </em></p>
<p>If we bring in the thumbs to the base of ring fingers – <em>Pritvi </em><em>Surabhi, </em>lethargy goes away and one becomes energetic..</p>
<p>If we bring in the thumbs to the base of middle fingers – <em>Shoonya </em><em>Surabhi</em>, mind becomes peaceful and light.</p>
<p>If we bring in the thumbs to the base of index fingers – <em>Vayu </em><em>Surabhi</em>, decisiveness increases.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Place the hands in the Anjali Mudra. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Join left hand index finger with the right hand middle finger and vice versa. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Join the left hand little finger with the right hand ring finger and vice versa.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Refer to picture 50.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Leave the thumbs separately</dd>
</dl>
<p>20<strong>. Hridaya Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Hridaya</em> means heart.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits :</strong>
</p>
<p>This is a combination of 2 mudras – Apana mudra and Vayu mudra. This is called <em>Mrita </em><em>sanjivini</em> or <em>Jivanadayi mudra </em>(remover of death and life giving mudra). In case of heart attack this mudra can save life. This mudra rectifies heart palpitations. Doing this mudra every morning and evening for 15 minutes prevents heart attacks. This mudra helps in curing stomach ache, acidity and constipation problems.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring the index finger to the base of thumb and join the tip of the thumb with middle and ring finger. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Press the back of the bent index finger with the insides of your thumb. Refer to picture 51.</dd>
</dl>
<p>21<strong>. Yoni Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Yoni </em>means cause. Yoni also means female reproductive organ.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra is particularly beneficial for women. When done during the monthly period, pain and discomfort is reduced significantly. It removes the problems associated with menopause and improves women’s overall health.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Lock all fingers of both hands together except the index fingers and thumb. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Join the index fingers and thumbs and point them downwards as shown in the picture 52. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>The hands are positioned in front of the stomach to perform this mudra. </dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>22. Ananta Prajna Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Ananta Prajna</em> means ocean of knowledge.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra helps in unlocking the subconscious mind. Whatever we need to learn is there in buried deep within the sub consciousness. There is nothing new to learn in this life. Whatever we are learning now is only a trigger to unfold the subconscious mind. <em>Ananta Prajna</em> Mudra helps in unlocking the subconscious mind. This mudra also helps in improving the memory.</p>
<p>People with ear problem and heart condition will also find this useful.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bend your middle fingers and bring it to the tip of the thumbs into akasha nudra (as in Picture 36) on both hands</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Link the two handed akasha mudra to form a infinite sign or chain link so that the right middle finger is over the left middle finger and right thumb is under the left thumb. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Interlace the ring and little fingers on both hands and join the tips of the Index fingers.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep your palms in this mudra on your ankle with tip of the index fingers pointing down.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Tip of the index fingers act as antenna which helps in tuning the mind to subtler things.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Close your eyes and contemplate on the heart center.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Feel the pulse in the tip of your index fingers.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u9rL7hG56Gs</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cteAAj42bVg</p>
<p>
<strong>23. Purna Prajna Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p><em>Purna Prajna</em> means complete knowledge. This mudra helps in getting the deeper understanding of subtle things.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra helps in unlocking the subconscious mind. Whatever we need to learn is buried deep within the sub consciousness. There is nothing new to learn in this life. Whatever we are learning now is only a trigger to unfold the subconscious mind. People with ear problem and heart condition will also find this useful.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Make a hook with index fingers.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring tip of the thumbs together and interlace the other fingers. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep your palms in this mudra on your ankle with tip of the thumbs pointing up.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Tip of the index fingers act as antenna which helps in tuning the mind to subtler things.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Close your eyes and contemplate on the heart center.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Feel the pulse in the tip of your index fingers.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cteAAj42bVg</p>
<p>
<strong>Do the following mudras daily:</strong>
</p>
<p>Our health is at our fingertips. For maintaining good health, practise the following mudras daily:</p>
<p><strong>Jnana mudra</strong> (brain function), <strong>Pritvi mudra</strong> (good for blood circulation and vitamin supply), <strong>Apana mudra</strong> (good for excretion, healthy gums, healthy genitals), <strong>Prana mudra</strong> (invigorates the body, improves eyesight and vitamin supply, and reinforces the benefits of other mudras) and <strong>Vayu mudra</strong> (for balancing <em>vata</em> in the body).</p>
<p>*Some of the Hasta Mudras are sourced from Mudra Vijnana and Arogya by Suman Chiplunkar</p>
<p>
<strong>Important things to know about the Mudras:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hasta mudras can be done by anyone at any time.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>As far as possible, the hands should face upwards while doing the mudras except for <strong>Chin</strong>, <strong>Chimaya</strong> and <strong>Adi mudras</strong>.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Doing the mudras on both hands is more beneficial.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Mudras can be done for few seconds, 10 minutes, half an hour or 50 minutes. If done for 50 minutes, the desired results will come.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>While doing the mudras, only the tip of the fingers are used. Pressing the fingers is not needed. Other fingers should be straight.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>There are no side effects from mudras. They can also be done while one is on medication.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>If the <strong>Prana mudra</strong>, <strong>Apana mudra</strong>, <strong>Jnana mudra</strong> and <strong>Pritvi mudra</strong> are done every day for 5-15 minutes, one’s health improves significantly.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Mudras not only improve physical health, but also improve mental health by reducing anger, increasing peace, and releasing one from addictions.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Puja Mudras</strong>
</p>
<p>The following mudras are done as a part of puja (worship). By doing as a part of daily ritual this not only helps in improving the health but also helps in remembering the Lord.</p>
<p>
<strong>Shanka (Conch) Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Shanka</em> means conch. Visualise the conch in Lord’s hand. Conch means wealth <em>(artha)</em> – material and spiritual.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra purifies the nadis, cools the body, improves hearing, digestion and functioning of the pituitary, pineal and thyroid glands, removes tonsil problems and is good for the functioning of the heart, intestines and kidneys. Practice of this mudra makes the voice smooth and soft like the sound of a conch and is beneficial for people with dust allergy.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring the left hand thumb to the base of the right thumb and wrap the other fingers of right hand around the left thumb. Join the tip of right thumb to the tips of left hand fingers. Refer to picture 47 and 55. </dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Sudharshana (Chakra) Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Sudharshana</em> is the Divine discuss which protects us from all negative forces. Visualise the <em>Sudharshana </em><em>chakra</em> in Lord’s hand. Sudharshana chakra also means righteousness <em>(dharma).</em></p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>Balances the pitta (fire) and kapha (phlegm) <em>doshas</em> (elements) in the body.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring the right palm over the left and bring thumb and small fingers together as shown in the picture 56.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Gada (Mace) Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Gada </em>means mace. <em>Gada </em>means noble desires. Visualise the <em>Gada </em>in Lord’s hand.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>According to the yoga shastra, this mudra energises 10 major nadis and invigorates the whole body. Voice becomes smooth and soft. By doing this mudra one is able to perceive the subtler things in life.<strong> </strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring the middle fingers together and wrap the fingers of both hands together as shown in the picture 57.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Padma (Lotus) Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Padma </em>means lotus. <em>Lotus </em>means lasting peace. Visualise the <em>Padma </em>in Lord’s hand.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>Helps in receiving the energy from the cosmos.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring the base of the palms together, cup the palms keeping the tips of the little fingers and thumbs together and spreading the rest of the fingers to form a lotus flower as shown in the picture 58.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Tarkshya Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p>Mounting on the divine bird Garuda, may the Lord come to me. In this mudra the middle and ring fingers look like Garuda’s wings.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra balances the water and air level in the body.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Lock little and index fingers on both hands as shown in the picture 59.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Avaahini Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p>Welcoming the Lord.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Place the sides of the little fingers together with the palms facing up in front of the solar plexus. Press the thumb gently into the base of the ring finger, while keeping the other fingers extended together as shown in picture 60.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Stapini Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p>Establishing the Lord in the heart.</p>
<p>
<strong>Sannidhayini Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p>May I remember your presence always.</p>
<p>
<strong>Samrodhani Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p>Be well established in my heart.</p>
<p>
<strong>Sanmukha Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p>Be happy towards me.</p>
<p>
<strong>Avaguntani Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p>Be well established in me.</p>
<p>
<strong>Prasada Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p>Bestow your grace on me.</p>
<p>
<strong>Denu Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p>Be wish yielding to me.</p>
<p>
<strong>Surya Dharshana Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning: </strong>
</p>
<p>Enlighten me.</p>
<p>
</p>
<p>The following are the mudras done through the body.</p>
<p>1<strong>. Ashwini Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Ashwa</em> means horse. This is called Ashwini Mudra because the anal contraction resembles the movement a horse makes with its sphincter immediately after evacuation of the bowels.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra strengthens the pelvic diaphragm and anus muscles, energises the uterus and prostate, removes piles and reduces intestinal diseases. It makes the downward flowing prana rise and raises the energy level from the <em>Mooladhara chakra</em>. It is beneficial for women in labour.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in <em>Siddasana</em>, <em>Padmasana</em>, <em>Ardha Padmasana </em>or<em> </em><em>Vajrasana</em>. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>If you cannot sit on the floor you can sit on a chair. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold the chin up. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring thumb and index fingers together in <em>Chin Mudra</em> on your knee. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>This asana involves the contraction and relaxation of the buttock muscles, sphincter, perineum, and the entire pelvic region. Inhale and hold the breath in and pull the anus in and out 15 times. Exhale and relax. Repeat as long as you can.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NQK3xXXi3lw</p>
<p>2<strong>. Maha Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Maha</em> means great.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra helps in curing consumption, haemorrhoids or piles, enlargement of spleen, indigestion, Gulma (chronic gastritis), leprosy, constipation, fever and all other diseases. It increases the lifespan and confers great <em>siddhis</em> on the practitioners. This mudra makes the prana to flow through <em>sushumna nadi.</em></p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit on your buttocks and stretch your left leg in front. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bend your right knee bringing the right heel close to the perineum. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Get hold of the left toes. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Inhale and do <em>antar kumbaka</em> (retain breath in).</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring chin and collar bones together in to <em>jaalandhara </em><em>bandha</em>. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold this position as long as you can. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Exhale as slowly as you can and relax. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Repeat the same on the right leg. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Repeat this three times on each leg. Refer to picture 69.</dd>
</dl>
<p>3<strong>. Viparitakarini Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Viparitakarini</em> is an inverted posture. In fact <em>Shirasasana</em> and <em>Sarvangasana</em> are also called <em>Viparitakarini</em>. The nectar <em>(amruta)</em> is continuously trickling down from the moon center at the <em>sahasrara chakra</em> and gets consumed in the sun centre at the <em>manipura chakra</em>. The vitality in the body exists as long as the nectar is there in the moon centre. Once the nectar gets depleted, old age sets in. This mudra revitalizes the moon centre. The same is mentioned in Bhagawat Gita wherein Shri Krishna says: <em>pusnami causadhih sarvah somo bhutva rasatmakah </em><span>(पुष्णामि चौषधीः सर्वाः सोमो भूत्वा रसात्मकः) </span>B.G. 15.13 - I become <em>Amruta </em>(nectar) in the moon and nourish all living beings.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>This posture is similar to <em>Sarvangasana</em> except that the throat muscles are not constricted in this mudra. In this mudra, the sun centre which is located at <em>manipura chakra,</em> goes above the moon centre which is located at the head. Moon is called <em>soma</em>. <em>Soma</em> means Shiva. <em>Soma</em> means <em>Mukya </em><em>Prana</em>. Prana level in the body increases. The digestive fire gets ignited. This energises the mind, slows down the ageing process, slows down greying of hair, removes wrinkles on the face and increases the heart volume. It decompresses the internal organs, rehydrates the discs, slows down the heart rate, oxygenates the blood and improves the Digestion.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>In Viparitakarani we are reversing the position of sun and moon centres so that the sun centre goes higher than moon and starts energizing the moon centre. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>With inhalation raise both feet above the ground. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Raise your waist up and support the back on your hands with the elbows on the ground. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring your toes in line with your eyes.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Do not throttle your neck muscles or apply any pressure on the neck muscles. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Breathe normally and hold this position for 1 minute and gradually increase the duration. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>With exhalation slowly come down and relax. Refer to picture 70.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong> Caution: </strong>
</p>
<p>People suffering from blood pressure, glaucoma, hernias, cardiovascular disease, cervical spondylitis, thrombosis, arteriosclerosis, and kidney problems should not practice headstand. Those suffering from neck injuries should perform this kriya under supervision.</p>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bkRhPELZFos</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5cV6fTuCmpQ</p>
<p>4<strong>. Khechari Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Kha</em> means space. <em>Chara </em>means move. Here we are moving the tongue in the throat space.<em> Kha</em> also means bliss. In Vedas it is said <em>somam pibet na suram pibet </em><span>(सोमं पिबेत् न सुरां पिबेत्)</span> – Drink the Soma rasa (nectar) and do not drink alcohol. We can drink the <em>soma rasa</em> produced within by doing<em> khechari</em> mudra.</p>
<p>There is a mantra in Veda which says <em>Om Vam Vartu mandala </em><em>madyasta sweta varno Varunantargata Shri Vasudeva mat </em><em>sharramastam Amruta Vristya Plavayatu (</em>ॐ वं वर्तुलमण्डलमध्यस्थः <span>श्वेतवर्णः वरुणान्तर्गतश्रीवासुदेवः मच्छरीरं अमृतवृष्ट्या आप्लावयतु ।।)</span> – In the crown centre amidst of the white hue the indrewller of <em>Varuna </em>may the Lord <em>Shri Vasudeva</em> nourish all the limbs of the body with <em>amruta</em> (nectar).</p>
<p>Moon centre in <em>Sahsrara chakra</em> (crown chakra) produces <em>Amruta </em>(soma rasa – nectar). It gets wasted when it falls and gets consumed in the sun centre (<em>Manipurs chakra</em>).</p>
<p>In the mouth, there are two dangling bits – one is tongue and another is inner tongue called<em> uvula.</em> Uvula looks like an udder. We are using the tongue to milk the <em>amruta </em>(nectar).</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>If the <em>sushumna i</em>s stopped without the suspension of prana, it perfects the khechari. By frequent practice of kechar, unmani follows. 4-47</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>One should practice khechari until one goes in to yoga Samadhi. In this sleep, time (death) does not exist 4-49</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>By the practice of this mudra the yogi becomes free from fainting, hunger, thirst and laziness. He or she becomes free from diseases, decay, old age and death. This mudra makes one an <em>urdhvaretas</em> (one in whom the energy flows upward). As the body of the yogi is filled with nectar, he will have resistance even to virulent poison. You feel the sweetness in the throat and bliss increases. This mudra gives <em>siddhis</em> (powers) to Yogis. This mudra helps in transcending the mind called <em>unmani bhava</em>. Khechari is the best of all mudras.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in Siddasana, Padmasana, Ardha Padmasana or Vajrasana. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>If you cannot sit on the floor you can sit on a chair. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold the chin up. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring the thumb and index finger together in chin mudra on your knees. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Inhale and raise your tongue up and take it as back as you can. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Stretch your neck up as back as you can as if you are looking at the ceiling in to <em>Akashi Mudra</em>. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Stretch your tongue further back so as to touch the root of the upper palate to catch the nectar trickling from the moon centre. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Feel the stretch in the lower tendon of the tongue.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>This slows down the breathing. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Remain here for as long as you can. Exhale and relax. Refer to pictures 71 and 72.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong> Caution:</strong>
</p>
<p>People with neck injury should do this mudra with caution.</p>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IVRRGK4YBbE</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eLzpd3__N8k</p>
<p>5<strong>. Shakti Chalana Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Shakti Chalana</em> means moving the Energy.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>Awakens the <em>kundalini shakti</em> quickly.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in <em>Siddasana</em>. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring the left heel near the anus. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring the right heel above it. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold the chin up. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring the palms on your knees. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Inhale and squeeze and pull the anus muscles up using the Aswini mudra. This pushes the downward flowing apana prana upwards. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>By doing this mudra the dormant energy is suffocated and is forced to rise upwards quickly. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>The Apana unites with the upward flowing energy, Prana, to create the Prana-Apana vayu which then enters the <em>Sushumna </em><em>Nadi.</em> </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold this position for as long as you can. Relax and repeat the same and do as long as you can.</dd>
</dl>
<p>6<strong>. Shambhavi Mudra:</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Gheranda Samhita</em> says, <em>vedas </em>and <em>puranas</em> are like public women because they have been abused by misunderstanding them. Treat the Shambhavi like a lady from a respectable family.</p>
<p><em>Hata Yoga Pradipika</em> says Shambhavi mudra consists of fixing the mind internally in the heart centre and fixing the eyes externally between the eye brow centre without blinking. When the yogi remains with mind turned within and when breathing has become slow and when the gaze is fixed without blinking, when although eyes are open he or she does not grasp the object, he is said to be in <em>Shabhavi mudra</em>. By the grace of Guru, one attains the state of Shambhu which is resplendent which is beyond what is heard and what is mentioned in the scriptures. 4-36, 37</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>This awakens the intuition faculty and deepens meditation.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Fix the gaze between the eyebrows and feel the energy rising in the <em>ajna chakra</em>. Direct the gaze towards the light by raising the eyebrows a little upwards. This helps the yogi to transcend the mind <em>(unmani).</em></dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Refer to picture 73.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eLzpd3__N8k</p>
<p>7<strong>. Shanmukhi Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p>The <em>Hata Yoga Pradipika</em> says that by sitting in<em> siddasana </em>and by assuming the <em>Shambhavi mudra</em>, one should listen with a concentrated mind to the inner sound. This is heard in the right ear.</p>
<p>Shanmukhi mudra is a preparation to hear this inner sound. Close the ears, the nose, the mouth, and the eyes. Then a clear sound is heard in the Sushumna whch is purified by pranayama. 4-68</p>
<p><em>Shanmukha</em> means six faces- eyes, ears, nose mouth, skin and mind.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This mudra helps in pratyahara, dhyana and in hearing the <em>anahata nada</em> (inner non-vibratory sound). The mind becomes introverted.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in <em>Siddasana, Padmasana, Ardha Padmasana </em>or<em> </em><em>Vajrasana</em>. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold the chin up. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Close the ears with the thumbs.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Close the eyes with the index fingers.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Close nostrils partially with the middle fingers.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Pull the upper lips down with the ring fingers.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Push the lower lips up with the little fingers. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Breathe gently.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hear the inner sound and dive deep into meditation. Refer to picture 74.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold this position for as long as you can. Relax and repeat the same and do as long as you can.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TX116N5W0yE</p>
<p>8<strong>. Yoga Mudra</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>This helps in curing abdominal problems. It reduces the fat around the waist and stomach, flexes the back muscles and energises the lungs.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in <em>Padmasana</em> and bring the heels as in as you can. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep the back, neck and head in one line. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Place the palms on the feet. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Exhale slowly and bend forward and touch the ground with the forehead.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Remain here as long as you can.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>If you retain the pose for a long time, you can breathe as usual. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Inhale and come up. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Instead of keeping the hands on the heels, you can take them to the back and catch hold of the left wrist with your right hand.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Refer to picture 75.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Repeat a few times. </dd>
</dl>
<p>9<strong>. Moola Bandha</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Moola</em> means root.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>Moola Bandha enables one in doing sadhana. It gives Dhatu-Pushti (nerve-vigor) and relieves constipation. This helps in awakening the <em>kundalini Shakti</em> and benefits people with piles related problems. Moola Bandha can be combined with the practice of concentration, meditation, pranayama and all other Yogic Kriyas.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in <em>Siddasana</em>. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring the left heel near the anus. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring the right heel above it. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold the chin up. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Place the palms on the knees. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Exhale and squeeze and pull the anus muscles up so that the downward flowing Apana Prana is pushed upwards. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>The Apana unites with the upward flowing energy, Prana, to create the Prana-Apana vayu which then enters the Sushumna Nadi.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold this position for as long as you can. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Relax and repeat the same and do as long as you can.</dd>
</dl>
<p>10<strong>. Jaalandar Bandha</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Jaala</em> means net or mesh.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>In this bandha you are spreading the net in the throat to catch the nectar trickling down from the moon centre in the head so that it will not fall into the sun centre (<em>manipura chakra</em>) and get consumed in the digestive fire <em>(jataragni)</em>. This bandha slows down the aging process and activates the <em>vishuddi chakra.</em></p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in <em>Siddasana, Padmasana, </em><em>Ardha Padmasana </em>or<em> Vajrasana</em>. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>If you cannot sit on the floor you can sit on a chair. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold the chin up. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Place your hands on your knees. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Exhale and bring the chin and collar bone together. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Remain in this position for as long as you can. Refer to picture 76.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Inhale, bring your chin back to the normal position and relax. </dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hczg6XHCoiY</p>
<p>11<strong>. Uddiyana Bandha</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Ut</em> means up.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This bandha makes the Prana to fly up through the <em>sushumna nadi.</em> It activates the digestive fire, activates the <em>manipura chakra</em>, reduces the fat around the stomach. Keeps stomach, intestine, uterus and prostate healthy. This bandha pushes the energy from <em>Swadistana </em>and <em>Manipura chakra</em> to the higher chakras.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd><em>Uddiyan</em> bandha can be done by sitting or standing. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Those who can do this bandha can do the <em>nauli kriya</em> well. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in <em>Siddasana, Padmasana, Ardha Padmasana </em>or<em> </em><em>Vajrasana</em>. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold the chin up. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>If you are standing keep the legs slightly apart. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring your palms on your knees. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep the elbows straight and lean forward. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Exhale completely and pull the diaphragm (the muscular portion between the thoracic cavity and stomach) up. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>This will draw the abdominal muscles back. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold it for as long as you can and exhale and relax. Refer to picture 77.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Repeat few times.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NQK3xXXi3lw</p>
<p>12<strong>. Maha Bandha</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Maha</em> means great.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Maha Bandha </em>has the benefit of all 3 bandhas – <em>moola</em>, <em>uddiyana</em> and <em>jaalandara</em> bandha. This bandha helps in curing the diseases and increases the lifespan.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Maha Mudra is the combination of all 3 bandhas – <em>moola</em>, <em>uddiyana</em> and <em>jaalandara</em> bandha all done at a time. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in <em>Siddasana, Padmasana, </em><em>Ardha Padmasana </em>or<em> </em><em>Vajrasana</em>. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Hold the chin up. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Place your palms on your knees. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Exhale, pull the anus and diaphragm up and pull the abdominal muscles back. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring the chin and collar bone together. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Remain here for as long as you can. Refer to picture 78.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Inhale and relax.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NQK3xXXi3lw</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a2G7cVUMWEE</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hczg6XHCoiY</p>
<p>13<strong>. Maha Vedha</strong></p>
<p>
<em> </em>
<strong>Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p><em>Maha</em> means great. <em>Vedha</em> means piercing.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits: </strong>
</p>
<p>This helps in curing haemorrhoids or piles, enlargement of spleen, indigestion, gulma (chronic gastritis), leprosy, constipation, fever and other diseases. Life span is increased. It confers great siddhis on the practitioners. This remove the wrinkles, grey hairs and trembling in the body.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Sit in Siddasana, Padmasana or Ardha Padmasana. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Keep the chin up. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring your palms on your knees. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Draw the breath slowly. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Retain the breath. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Press the chin against the chest and pull the anus and diaphragm up and pull the abdominal muscles back. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Place the palms on the ground. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Raise the buttocks slowly and bump them gently against the ground. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>The asana must be intact and firm when you raise the buttocks. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring the chin and collar bone together. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Remain here for as long as you can. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Inhale and relax. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>There is not much difference between maha mudra, maha bandha and maha vedha. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Refer to picture 79.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>They are 3 stages of one mudra.</dd>
</dl>
<p>Picture 32: Chin mudra</p>
<p>Picture 33: Chinmaya mudra</p>
<p>Picture 34: Adi mudra</p>
<p>Picture 35: Jnana mudra</p>
<p>Picture 36: Akasha mudra</p>
<p>Picture 37: Pritvi mudra</p>
<p>Picture 38 Varuna mudra</p>
<p>Picture 39 :Vyana mudra</p>
<p>Picture 40:Apana mudra</p>
<p>Picture 41:Prana mudra</p>
<p>Picture 42:Vayu mudra.</p>
<p>Picture 43:Shoonya mudra</p>
<p>Picture 44:Surya mudra</p>
<p>Picture 45: JalodharaNashaka mudra</p>
<p>Picture 46 :Linga mudra</p>
<p>Picture 47<strong>:</strong>Shanka mudra</p>
<p>Picture 48:Sahaja Shanka mudra</p>
<p>Picture 49:Aditi mudra</p>
<p>Picture 50:Surabhi mudra / Denu mudra</p>
<p>Picture 51 :Hridaya mudra</p>
<p>Picture 52: Yoni mudra</p>
<p>Picture 53:Ananta Prajna Mudra</p>
<p>Picture 54: Purna Prajna Mudra</p>
<p>Picture 55: Shanka Mudra</p>
<p>Picture 56:Sudharshana Mudra</p>
<p>Picture 57:Gada Mudra</p>
<p>Picture 58: Padma Mudra</p>
<p>Picture 59 :Tarkshya Mudra</p>
<p>Picture 60: Avaahini Mudra (Avaahito Bhava)</p>
<p>Picture 61:Stapini Mudra (Samstapito Bhava)</p>
<p>Picture 63:Samrodhani Mudra (Sanniruddo Bhava)</p>
<p>Picture 64:Sanmukha Mudra (Sanmukho Bhava)</p>
<p>Picture 62: Sannidhayini Mudra (Sannihito Bhava)</p>
<p>Picture 65:Avaguntani Mudra (Avaguntito Bhava)</p>
<p>Picture 66: Prasada Mudra (Suprasanno Bhava)</p>
<p>Picture 67:Denu Mudra (Surabhi)</p>
<p>Picture 68: Surya Dharshana Mudra</p>
<p>Picture 69: Maha mudra</p>
<p>Picture 70: Viparitakarini Mudra</p>
<p>Picture 72:Khechari and Akashi mudra</p>
<p>Picture 71: Khechari mudra</p>
<p>Picture 73 :Shambhavi Mudra</p>
<p>Picture 74: Shanmukhi Mudra</p>
<p>Picture 75 :Yoga mudra</p>
<p>  Picture 76: Jaalandar Bandha</p>
<p>Picture 77: Uddiyana Bandha</p>
<p>Picture 78: Maha bandha</p>
<p>Picture 79: Maha Vedha</p>
<p>63</p>
<p>64</p>
<p>
<em>Parchodayat, Om apo jyoti raso amrutam Brahma </em>
<em>bhurbhuvaswarom</em>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Slowly exhale completely through the right nostril and close both nostrils</dd>
<dt>Â </dt>
<dd>Hold the breath out (<em>bahya</em> <em>kumbhaka</em> ) and repeat the mantra <em>Om bhuhu Om bhuvaha Om Suvaha Om Mahaha Om </em><em>Janaha Om Tapaha Om Satyam Om Tat Savitur Vareyanm </em><em>Bhargo Dhevasya Dhimahi Dhiyoyonah Parchodayat, Om </em><em>apo jyoti raso amrutam Brahma bhurbhuvaswarom</em></dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Inhale through left nostril again and repeat 5 times</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Slowly increase the kumbaka duration for 2 mantras</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Long inhale and exhale and relax.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong> Caution: </strong>
</p>
<p>Stop doing this pranayama if you feel tired or giddy. People with either low or high blood pressure should do this pranayama with caution.</p>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dIRoWicPYh4</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bk6VYmjXW0A</p>
<p>14.<strong> So Ham Pranayama</strong></p>
<p>
<strong> Meaning:</strong>
</p>
<p>Every day, every one of us chant the <em>Hamsa mantra</em> 21600 times approximately (one per inhalation and exhalation). <em>Hamsa </em>is swan. The<em> Prana</em> principle in us is called <em>Hamsa</em> and<em> Prana </em>is doing this to invoke the <em>Parama Hamsa</em> – Supreme Lord in us.</p>
<p>Hamsa has two words <em>Ham </em>and <em>Sa.</em> In a reverse order this becomes <em>So Ham</em>. <em>So</em> means <em>Saha</em> which means That, Absolute, Supreme Lord. <em>Aham</em> means individual soul. I am <em>aham </em>for myself. You are <em>aham </em>for yourself. But the Supreme Lord is the <em>aham</em> for everyone. <em>Aham</em> means <em>aheya</em> – we can exist giving up. Supreme Lord is <em>aheaya</em> (the inseparable principle) for everyone.</p>
<p>When we go deep in the<em> sadhana </em>(practice) we realise how insignificant we are. <em>So Ham</em> means the individual soul cannot exist without Him (Supreme Lord). <em>So Ham</em> means the individual and the Supreme Lord co-exist together. Supreme Lord is the closest friend of the individual soul – <em>jiva</em>. This is mentioned in the Mundaka Upanishad as <em>dwa suparna sayuja sakhaya </em>(द्वा <span>सुपर्णा सयुजा सखाया)</span><em>.</em></p>
<p><em>So </em>means one who pervades in the macrocosm <em>(Brahmanda). </em><em>Aham</em> means one who is within the microcosm <em>(pindanda).</em> We are invoking the all-pervading Lord through <em>So Ham</em> Pranayama.</p>
<p>
<strong> Benefits:</strong>
</p>
<p>Calms the mind. Takes the mind deeper into meditation. Helps in awaking the kundalini.</p>
<p>
<strong> Process: </strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Bring your hands into <em>chin mudra </em>or<em> ananata prajna mudra</em> or<em> purna prajna mudra</em></dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>When you inhale mentally say <em>So</em> and when you exhale mentally say <em>Ham</em></dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Be aware of your breathing. Increase the rate of inhalation and exhalation like bastrika</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Repeat for 2-5 minutes and relax.</dd>
</dl>
<p>
<strong> Caution: </strong>
</p>
<p>Do it under the guidance of a teacher.</p>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eUIuYOMdWfw</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pm90njVrmUU</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eKz5sIs3eLU</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eUIuYOMdWfw</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lJxCAsMmpPc</p>
<p>Surya Namaskara – <em>with</em> Pranayama, Mudras & Bandha and Accupressure</p>
<p>103</p>
<p>102</p>
<p>Mudra and Bandha</p>
<p>Acu means needle. Acupressure means an art of treating disease by applying pressure with one’s thumb or using blunt objects. There are various acupressure points in the palms and feet soles. Applying pressure on these points helps in energising the internal organs.</p>
<p>
<strong>Accupressure and Health</strong>
</p>
<p>Acu means needle. Acupressure means an art of treating disease by applying pressure with one’s thumb or using blunt objects. There are various acupressure points in the palms and feet soles. Applying pressure on these points helps in energising the internal organs. Every day by pressing these points you will be able to check the health of your internal organs. Experience of pain while pressing any point indicates some problem with the associated organ. Everyday press the various points in the palms and feet sole for quick diagnosis of your body. If pain persists for few days, you can consult the doctor.</p>
<p>Diseases come to the body when the energy in the nadis does not flow properly. When the energy blocks are removed, body becomes disease free. Star Jumps when done along-with clapping is a very simple and effective technique for clearing energy blocks and energising all parts of the body.</p>
<p>Clapping helps in rejuvenating the whole body. Clapping is done while star jumping. Refer to the video:</p>
<p>
<strong>Video:</strong>
</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TqvPerZgKOY</p>
<p>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5cV6fTuCmpQ</p>
<p>
<strong>Conclusion:</strong>
</p>
<dl>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Live for others. Shift the center of your activities from yourself to include others too.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Minimise your personal needs. Spend some time for yourself everyday. Try to practice yoga at a particular time every day and allocate at least half an hour a day for your personal practice.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Take interest in the wellbeing of others.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Cut down on restaurant foods. Try to eat home cooked food.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Avoid eating cold food from the fridge or freezer. Minimise the usage of microwave cooked food.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Stay away from alcohol, drugs and cigarettes. </dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Eat healthy foods which are fresh, nourishing and easily digestible. Embrace vegetarian lifestyle.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Every morning drink a glass or two of luke warm water on an empty stomach. This will help in bowel movement.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>When you are at peace, your family is at peace. When your family is at peace, your community is at peace. When your community is at peace, your nation is at peace. When your nation is at peace, the world is at peace. The world peace should start from you.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>You can find peace only by going within and not in outer objects. Every day, spend some time meditating on the all-pure, most auspicious all-pervading Supreme indweller.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Forgive others and ask for forgiveness. Do not hate anyone.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Have a smile on your face always.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Earn your living by honest means.</dd>
<dt>ÂÂ</dt>
<dd>Those who live for others and practice yoga and meditation, their energy level goes up, glow in the face increases, skin colour improves, their sweat does not cause unpleasantness, their voice becomes pleasing to hear and they lead a contented life.</dd>
</dl>
<p>Sinus points</p>
<p>Sinus points</p>
<p>Picture 80a: Left hand</p>
<p>Picture 80b: Right hand</p>
<p>Accupressure points on hand</p>
<p>
<table>
<tr>
<td>
<p>1</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Brain</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>2</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Mental Nerves</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>3</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Pituitary</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>4</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Pineal</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>5</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Head Nerves</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>6</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Throat</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>7</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Neck</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>8</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Thyroid & Parathyroid</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>9</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Spine</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>10</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Piles</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>11</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Prostate</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>12</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Penis</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>13</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Vigina</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>14</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Utarus</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>15</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Testes & Ovaries</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>16</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Lymph glands</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>17</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Hip & Knee</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>18</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Bladder</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>19</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Intestines</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>20</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Colon</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>21</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Appendix</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>22</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Gall Bladder</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>23</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Liver</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>24</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Shoulder</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>25</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Pancreas</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>26</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Kidney</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>27</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Stomach</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>28</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Adrenal</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>29</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>S.P.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>30</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Lungs & Thymus</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>31</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Ear</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>32</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Energy</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>33</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Ear and Nerve</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>34</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>cold</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>35</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Eye</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>36</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Heart</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>37</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Spleen</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>38</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Lungs & Thymus</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</p>
<p>Surya Namaskara – <em>with</em> Pranayama, Mudras & Bandha and Accupressure</p>
<p>104</p>
<p>Sinus points</p>
<p>Sinus points</p>
<p>Picture 81b: Right foot</p>
<p>Picture 81a: Left foot</p>
<p>Accupressure points on feet</p>
<p>For treatment: Pressure is to be applied on and around these points of the soles</p>
<p>105</p>
<p>Mudra and Bandha</p>
<p>By pressing the middle part of the fore arm as shown in the picture, energy level in the body can be increased and dissipation of energy can be prevented. This is beneficial especially for elderly people.</p>
<p>Picture 82:Accupressure for preventing old age problems</p>
<p>Surya Namaskara – <em>with</em> Pranayama, Mudras & Bandha and Accupressure</p>
<p>106</p>
<p>107</p>
<p>Mudra and Bandha</p>
<p>Surya Namaskara – <em>with</em> Pranayama, Mudras & Bandha and Accupressure</p>
<p>
<strong>114</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>115</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Appendix</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Surya Namaskara</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Ado Mukha Swanasana</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Dwi Pada Prasaranasana</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Eka Pada Prasaranasana</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Hanumasana</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Sama Stiti</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Sastanga Namaskara</strong>
</p>
<p>Surya Namaskara – <em>with</em> Pranayama, Mudras & Bandha and Accupressure</p>
<p>
<strong>110</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Surya Namaskara</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Picture 8: Shashankasana</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Urdwasana</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Urdwa Mukha Swanasana</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Uttanasana</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>111</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Appendix</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Surya Namaskara</strong>
</p>
<p>16<strong> Step Surya Namaskara</strong></p>
<p>Surya Namaskara – <em>with</em> Pranayama, Mudras & Bandha and Accupressure</p>
<p>
<strong>112</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Pranayama</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Ardha Padmasana</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Bhramari Pranayama</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Bhastrika Pranayama</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Chandra Loma Pranayama</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Dharana Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>113</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Appendix</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Pranayama</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Nadi Shodana Pranayama</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Padmasana</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Surya Loma Pranayama</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Sheetakari Pranayama</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Sheetali Pranayama </strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Siddasana</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Vajrasana – front</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Vajrasana – back</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Mudra and Bandha</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong> Adi mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Aditi mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Akasha mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Apana mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Ananta Prajna mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Chinmaya mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Denu mudra /Surabhi mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Hridaya mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Chin mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Mudra and Bandha</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>JalodharaNashaka mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Jnana mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Linga mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Pritvi mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Prana mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Purna Prajna Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Shoonya mudra </strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Sahaja Shanka mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Shanka mudra </strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Mudra and Bandha</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong> Surya mudra </strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Vayu mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Varuna mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Vyana mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Yoni mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Puja Mudras</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Denu Mudra </strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Avaguntani Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Avaahini Mudra </strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Padma Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Gada Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Prasada Mudra </strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Sannidhayini Mudra </strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Samrodhani Mudra </strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Sanmukha Mudra </strong>
</p>
<p>Surya Namaskara – <em>with</em> Pranayama, Mudras & Bandha and Accupressure</p>
<p>
<strong>119</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>118</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Appendix</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Puja Mudras</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Sudharshana Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Stapini Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Shanka Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Surya Dharshana Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Tarkshya Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Kaya Mudras</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Khechari and Akashi mudra </strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong> Jaalandar Bandha</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Khechari mudra </strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Maha mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Maha bandha </strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Maha Vedha</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Shanmukhi Mudra </strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Shambhavi Mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Kaya Mudras</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Viparitakarini mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Uddiyana Bandha </strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Yoga mudra</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Accupressure</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Sinus points</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Sinus points</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Accupressure points on hand</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Sinus points</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Sinus points</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Accupressure points on feet</strong>
</p>
<p>Surya Namaskara – <em>with</em> Pranayama, Mudras & Bandha and Accupressure</p>
<p>
<strong>122</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Index</strong>
</p>
<p>Abdominal problems, 96</p>
<p>Accupressure, 103</p>
<p>Acidity, 80</p>
<p>Adhama Prana, 38</p>
<p>Adhara Mudra, 68</p>
<p>Adi Mudra, 70</p>
<p>Aditi Mudra, 78</p>
<p>Ado Mukha Swanasana, 20</p>
<p>Ahimsa, 41</p>
<p>Akasha mudra, 50</p>
<p>Akasha, 72</p>
<p>Ananta Prajna Mudra, 81</p>
<p>Antar Kumbhaka, 39, 62</p>
<p>Anuloma, 48</p>
<p>Apana Mudra, 74</p>
<p>Apana mudra, 83</p>
<p>Apana, 39</p>
<p>Aparigraha, 41</p>
<p>Ardha Padmasana, 45, 46, 48, 50, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 61, 62, 88, 97, , 98, 99, 100</p>
<p>Asamprajana samadhi, 42</p>
<p>Ashwini Mudra, 88</p>
<p>Asteya, 41</p>
<p>Asthma, 20, 58, 59, 76, 77</p>
<p>Aswini Mudra, 67</p>
<p>Avaahini Mudra, 86</p>
<p>Avaguntani Mudra, 87</p>
<p>Avidya, 71</p>
<p>Bahya Kumbhaka, 39, 63</p>
<p>Bandha, 68</p>
<p>Basti, 41</p>
<p>Bastrika Pranayama Type 1, 56,</p>
<p>Bastrika Pranayama Type 2, 58</p>
<p>Bhagawat Gita 4th chapter, 38</p>
<p>Bharata Natyam, 69</p>
<p>Bhramari Pranayama Type 1, 50</p>
<p>Bhramari Pranayama Type 2, 51</p>
<p>Blood circulation, 73</p>
<p>Blood pressure, 50, 51</p>
<p>Body immunity, 4</p>
<p>Brahmacharya, 41</p>
<p>Breathing sequence – Surya Namaskara, 26</p>
<p>Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, 4</p>
<p>Bronchitis, 20</p>
<p>Chandra loma pranayama, 52, 53</p>
<p>Chin Mudra, 70</p>
<p>Chinmaya Mudra, 70</p>
<p>Chronic Gastritis, 89, 100</p>
<p>Clavicular breathing, 70</p>
<p>Cold, 76</p>
<p>Constipation, 80, 89, 96</p>
<p>Continuous sneezing, 79</p>
<p>Denu Mudra, 87</p>
<p>Dhanvantari Mantra, 68</p>
<p>Dhauti, 41</p>
<p>Diarrhoea, 76</p>
<p>Dust allergy, 78</p>
<p>Dwi Pada Prasaranasana, 17, 15, 16, 22, 25</p>
<p>Ear pain, 51, 75</p>
<p>Ear problem, 82</p>
<p>Eye sight, 74</p>
<p>Fever, 89, 100</p>
<p>Gada (Mace) Mudra, 85</p>
<p>Gheranda Samhita, 67</p>
<p>Haemorrhoids, 100</p>
<p>Hamsa mantra, 63</p>
<p>Hanumasana, 16, 23</p>
<p>Hasta Mudra, 68</p>
<p>Hata Yoga, 41</p>
<p>Headache, 71, 76, 77</p>
<p>Heart attack, 80</p>
<p>Heart problem, 82</p>
<p>Hridaya Mudra, 80</p>
<p>Ida Nadi, 42, 43, 47, 48, 52, 53</p>
<p>Insomnia, 50, 55, 56, 60, 71, 73, 76</p>
<p>Intestional diseases, 88, 100</p>
<p>Ishwara Pranidhana, 41</p>
<p>Jaalandar Bandha, 97</p>
<p>Jalandhar Bandha, 67</p>
<p>Jalodhara Nashaka Mudra, 76</p>
<p>Jnana Mudra, 71</p>
<p>Jnana mudra, 83</p>
<p>Kapalabhati, 42, 59</p>
<p>Kathakali, 69</p>
<p>Kaya Mudra, 68, 88</p>
<p>Khechari Mudra, 67</p>
<p>Khechari Mudra, 91</p>
<p>Kuchupudi, 69</p>
<p>Kumbhaka, 40</p>
<p>Kundalini Shakti, 3, 41</p>
<p>Leprosy, 89, 100</p>
<p>Linga Mudra, 77</p>
<p>Madhyama Prana, 38</p>
<p>Maha Bandha, 67, 99</p>
<p>Maha Mudra, 67</p>
<p>Maha Vedha, 67, 100</p>
<p>Mahabharata, 4</p>
<p>Mana Mudra, 68</p>
<p>Manipura chakra, 57, 58, 67</p>
<p>Menopause, 80</p>
<p>Mental health, 37</p>
<p>Migraine, 22</p>
<p>Mohini Aattam, 69</p>
<p>Moola Bandha, 67</p>
<p>Moola Bandha, 96</p>
<p>Mudra, 65</p>
<p>Mukhya Prana, 37</p>
<p>Mundaka Upanishad mantra, 64</p>
<p>Mundaka Upanishad, 64</p>
<p>Nadi Shodhana Pranayama, 46</p>
<p>Nauli, 41</p>
<p>Navel displacement, 14, 25</p>
<p>Neti, 41</p>
<p>Niyama, 41</p>
<p>Obesity, 14</p>
<p>Oddissi dance, 69,</p>
<p>Padma (Lotus) Mudra, 85</p>
<p>Padmasana, 45, 46, 48, 50, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 61, 62, 88, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100</p>
<p>Parama Hamsa, 63</p>
<p>Piles, 88, 100</p>
<p>Pingala Nadi, 42, 43, 47, 48, 52, 54</p>
<p>Pneumonia, 76, 77</p>
<p>Prana Mudra, 74, 83</p>
<p>Prana Shakti, 1</p>
<p>Prana, 39</p>
<p>Pranayama, 35</p>
<p>Pranayama mantra in Mahanarayana upanishad, 62</p>
<p>Prasada Mudra, 87</p>
<p>Pritvi Mudra, 72, 83</p>
<p>Puja Mudras, 84</p>
<p>Puraka, 39</p>
<p>Purna Prajna Mudra, 82</p>
<p>Rechaka, 39</p>
<p>Running nose, 76</p>
<p>Sahaja Shanka Mudra, 78</p>
<p>Sahasrara chakra, 67, 89</p>
<p>Sama Stiti (Relax), 13, 25</p>
<p>Samana, 39</p>
<p>Samrodhani Mudra, 87</p>
<p>Sandya Vandana Pranayama, 61</p>
<p>Sanmukha Mudra, 87</p>
<p>Sannidhayini Mudra, 86</p>
<p>Santosha, 41</p>
<p>Sarvangasana, 67</p>
<p>Sastanga Namaskara, 19</p>
<p>Satya, 41</p>
<p>Shakti Chalana Mudra, 93</p>
<p>Shambhavi Mudra, 67, 93</p>
<p>Shanka Mudra, 77, 84</p>
<p>Shanmukhi Mudra, 67, 93</p>
<p>Shashankasana, 18, 21</p>
<p>Sheetakari Pranayama, 55</p>
<p>Sheetali Pranayama, 55,</p>
<p>Shirasasana, 67</p>
<p>Shoonya mudra, 47, 48, 75</p>
<p>Shoucha, 41</p>
<p>Siddasana, 45, 46, 48, 50, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 61, 62, 88, 97, , 98, 99, 100</p>
<p>So Ham Pranayama, 63</p>
<p>Sore throat, 76</p>
<p>Speech problem, 75</p>
<p>Spleen and bile problems, 55, 100</p>
<p>Stapini Mudra, 86</p>
<p>Stomach ache, 80</p>
<p>Sudharshana (Chakra) Mudra, 84</p>
<p>Surabhi Mudra / Denu Mudra, 79</p>
<p>Surya Dharshana Mudra, 87</p>
<p>Surya Loma Pranayama, 54</p>
<p>Surya Mudra, 76</p>
<p>Surya Namaskara, 1, 3</p>
<p>Surya Namaskara Mantra in</p>
<p>Soura Sooktam, 5</p>
<p>Atharva veda, 6</p>
<p>Mahanarayana Upanishad, 6</p>
<p>Katopanishad/Mundakopanishad/Shwetaswatara Upanishad, 6</p>
<p>Mundakopanishad, 7</p>
<p>Gayatri dhyana, 7</p>
<p>Rig Veda, 7</p>
<p>Aitareya Upanishad, 8</p>
<p>Isavasya Upanishad, 8</p>
<p>Bhagawat Gita 15th chapter, 8</p>
<p>Bhagawat Gita 13th chapter, 9</p>
<p>16 Surya Namaskara Mantras, 10</p>
<p>Surya Yajna Namavali, 27</p>
<p>Sushumna Nadi, 42, 43</p>
<p>Swadhyaya, 41</p>
<p>Tapas, 41</p>
<p>Tarkshya Mudra, 85</p>
<p>Throat disorders, 60</p>
<p>Tonsil problems, 77, 84</p>
<p>Triveni Sangam, 43</p>
<p>Tuberculosis, 77</p>
<p>Turiya avasta, 42</p>
<p>Udana, 39</p>
<p>Uddiyana Bandha, 98</p>
<p>Uddyan Bandha, 67</p>
<p>Ujjayi Pranayama, 60</p>
<p>Unmani Avastha, 42</p>
<p>Urdwa Mukha Swanasana, 20</p>
<p>Urdwasana, 14</p>
<p>Uterus ailments, 14, 25</p>
<p>Uttanasana, 14, 25</p>
<p>Vajrasana, 46, 46, 48, 50, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 61, 62, 88, 97, , 98, 99, 100</p>
<p>Valmiki Ramayan, 4</p>
<p>Varuna Mudra, 73</p>
<p>Vayu mudra, 47, 48, 75, 83</p>
<p>Vertigo pain, 75</p>
<p>Viloma Pranayama, 48</p>
<p>Viloma, 48</p>
<p>Viparita Karini Mudra, 67, 89</p>
<p>Vrajoli Mudra, 67</p>
<p>Vrischikasana, 67</p>
<p>Vyana Mudra, 73</p>
<p>Vyana, 39</p>
<p>Yakshagana, 69</p>
<p>Yama, 41</p>
<p>Yoga Mudra, 96</p>
<p>Yoni Mudra, 80</p>
<p>
<strong>123</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Appendix</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Index</strong>
</p>
<p>Surya Namaskara – <em>with</em> Pranayama, Mudras & Bandha and Accupressure</p>
<p>
<strong>124</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Class Prayer</strong>
</p>
<p>Om Aapada MouLi Paryantam</p>
<p>GuruNaam Aakritim Smaret</p>
<p>Tena Vignaaha Pranashyanthi</p>
<p>Sidhyanti cha Manorataaha</p>
<p>
<strong>ॐ</strong>
<span> आपादमौलिपर्यन्तं गुरूणाम् आकृतिं स्मरेत् ।</span>
</p>
<p>तेन विघ्नाः प्रणश्यन्ति सिद्ध्यन्ति च मनोरथाः ।।</p>
<p>Om, to overcome the difficulties in life, meditate on the form of a Guru. Through His Grace, you will overcome all the hurdles and will achieve your goal.</p>
<p>Yogena Chittasya Padena Vachaam</p>
<p>malam Sharirasya cha Vaidyakena</p>
<p>Yopakarottam Pravaram Muninaam</p>
<p>Patanjalim Praanjaliraanatosmi</p>
<p>
<span>योगेन चित्तस्य पदेन वाचां मलं शरीरस्य च वैद्यकेन।</span>
</p>
<p>यो<span>ऽपाकरोत् तं प्रवरं मुनीनां पतञ्जलिं प्राञ्जलिरान</span>तोऽस्मि ।।</p>
<p>Through Yoga mind becomes clear, through grammar speech becomes clear, through Ayurveda bodily impurities are removed. Our prostrations to Patanjali Rishi who is the authority in all these three areas.</p>
<p>Ananta Gunapoornaya</p>
<p>Doshadooraya Vishnave</p>
<p>Namaha Shri Prananaathaya</p>
<p>Bhakta aBeesta Pradayine</p>
<p>
<span>अनन्तगुणपूर्णाय दोषदूराय विष्णवे ।</span>
</p>
<p>नमः श्रीप्राणनाथाय भक्ताभीष्टप्रदायिने ।।</p>
<p>Prostrations to the Lord Vishnu, who has the infinite auspicious qualities and who is beyond defects and is the Lord of Lakshmi, who fulfils desires of all devotees.</p>
<p>Buddir Balam Yasho Dhairyam</p>
<p>Nirbhayatvam Arogatha</p>
<p>Ajadyam Vakpatutwam cha</p>
<p>Hanumat Smaranat Bhavet</p>
<p>
<span>बुद्धिर्बलं यशो धैर्यं निर्भयत्वमरोगता ।</span>
</p>
<p>
<span>अजाड्यं वाक्पटुत्वं च हनूमत्स्मरणाद् भवेत् ।।</span>
</p>
<p>By contemplating on Hanuman, one gets all eight siddhis – intelligence, strength, glory, courage, fearlessness, good health, vigour (energy) and mastery of speech.</p>
<p>Satchidananda Roopaya</p>
<p>Vishvotpatyadhi Hetave</p>
<p>Tapatraya Vinashaya</p>
<p>Sri Krishnaya Namo Namaha</p>
<p>सच्चिदानन्दरूपाय विश्वोत्पत्त्यादिहेतवे ।</p>
<p>तापत्रयविनाशाय श्रीकृष्णाय नमो नमः ।।</p>
<p>Our prostration to the Lord Krishna, who is the embodiment of Satchidananda, Lord of the Universe, the remover of all three taapas (adhibhoutik, adhidaivik and adhyatmik problems associated within oneself, immediate, surrounding and far away).</p>
<p>Om Naham Karta Harih Karta</p>
<p>Tat Puja Karma chakilam</p>
<p>Tathapi Matkrita Puja</p>
<p>Tat Prasadena Nanyatha</p>
<p>Om Shantihi Shantihi Shantihi</p>
<p><strong>ॐ</strong> नाहं कर्ता हरिः कर्ता तत्पूजा कर्म चाखिलम् ।</p>
<p>तथापि मत्कृता पूजा तत्प्रसादेन नान्यथा ।।</p>
<p><strong>ॐ</strong>  शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः</p>
<p>I am not the doer, Hari is the doer. Still, I got this opportunity to do the Puja by Hari's Grace alone.</p>
<p>Om Lord is Jnanananda Swarupa (Knowledge-bliss personified). Om Lord is Jnanananda Swarupa (Knowledge-bliss personified).</p>
<p>
<strong>125</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Appendix</strong>
</p>
<p>
<strong>Class Prayer</strong>
</p>
<p>Surya Namaskara – <em>with</em> Pranayama, Mudras & Bandha and Accupressure</p>
<p>
<strong>126</strong>
</p>
</body>
</html>
