<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Acknowledgement</h1>
<p>I have been longing to write this letter of thanks ever since I started meeting people for the purpose of writing this book.</p>
<p>At the forefront of my thoughts is Dr. R.S. Praveen Kumar, IPS, Secretary, TSWREIS for sharing the dominant perspective behind Poorna’s success. I immensely thank him for describing every detail related to the expedition that has left me inspired for life.</p>
<p>My thanks to Poorna’s coaches Mr. Sekhar Babu and Mr.  Parmesh Singh, for bringing alive the everyday events that constituted the expedition and for putting up with my queries constantly. I thank Mr. Anand Kumar, Poorna’s partner in this journey, who walked me through the expedition with his narration and for sharing his keen observations of Poorna and her sparkling spirit.</p>
<p>During my interviews with the aforementioned,  <em>every person got in touch with their self, allowed me the honour of looking into them for a brief while. While each of them owned a deep philosophy sprouting from extreme agony, they always respected the thought of existence and life. The perspective of every person touched a chord in me and left me with tears of happiness. I am extremely grateful to them for such an ecstatic experience that I would treasure forever.</em></p>
<p>I thank Jyothi aka Mr. Roshan Ghatraj, Course Director, HMI and Wing Commander Sridharan for sharing their experiences with the  <em>Swaeroes</em> at HMI and Ladakh respectively.</p>
<p>I thank Mr. Pranesh Siravara and Mr. Ravindranath, of Prism Books Pvt. Ltd., for their trust and conviction in me to write this book. </p>
<p>I thank Ms. Shubha Srikanth, the incredible editor who quietly altered and alarmed me in equal measure. She shares the accomplishment of the book as much as I do.</p>
<p>I thank Mr. Chandrahaas, Retired Chief Commissioner, Income Tax, for pitching in at the right time to enhance the content of this book. </p>
<p>I thank Ms. Sathyavathi Kondaveeti, Chief functionary, Bhoomika and Ms. Mrunalini Chunduru, Retired Professor, Telugu University for recommending me to Prism Books Pvt. Ltd., </p>
<p>My thanks are due to Dr. P.S.R. Sharma, Dr. Venkat Raju, Mr. Shaik Mannan, Mrs. Lakshmi Bai, Swapna, employees of TSWREIS for providing the facts and photographs. </p>
<p>I thank my friends, Padmaja, Sireesha, Charita and my helpers Swathi, Zakiya and Swarna who supported me in their own ways to complete this book. </p>
<p>I am in awe of Poorna and her family, Poorna for her humility, kindness grit and tenacity, and her parents for respecting Poorna’s choices. Thanking them would never be enough. I  admire their simple and beautiful souls.</p>
<p>Finally, much love to my partner Krishna Mohan, for his support and excitement, and Dhruv, my special kid who this time took a turn and tolerated my tantrums.</p>
<p>This book defines all the people who championed the cause called ‘Poorna’ and I am grateful to be a part of it.</p>
<p><strong>Aparna Thota</strong></p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
