<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000e">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Foreword</h1>
		<p>It was August 2014.</p>
<p>The new state of Telangana was just born. The wounds of decades long struggle haven’t yet started healing and the borders between two states seem very artificial and surreal. Amidst all this I happened to visit Markapur town in Prakasam  district of Andhra Pradesh. On the way, I couldn’t resist the temptation to visit a Social Welfare Residential School for Girls in Vijayapuri South, next to the mighty Nagarjuna Sagar dam.</p>
<p>I was there quite early that morning, and the school was busy preparing for assembly. Ms. Padmaja, one of the committed school leaders of social  welfare system, insisted that I should address the school assembly. As I approached the gathering reluctantly, I could see the joy in the eyes of the children when they saw their former Secretary in their school, which is a rare event. Without wasting time, I posed a straight question to the gathering: ‘How many of you want to scale Mount Everest?’ I  have no idea why I asked that question, but it was involuntary. Perhaps, everyone assembled there looked like Poorna.</p>
<p>Lo and behold, all six hundred hands went up in the air. This was a dream  come true spectacle in a schooling system which has been emblematic of neglect, mistrust, and helplessness. None of the students knew the dangers of high altitude mountaineering. Strange as it may seem, it was the same kids and their parents who had to be goaded to sign up for rock climbing camps, leave alone mountaineering. Everywhere, we were greeted with thumbs down when we broached the topic of mountaineering during pre-Poorna days. But some events change the course of history.</p>
<p>Poorna and Anand’s audacious assault on centuries old inferiority triggered this tsunami of confidence in the young minds, leading to many unimaginable happenings in welfare schools which were on ventilator support. That was also when it struck me that Poorna’s story must reach not just the nooks and corners of India, but of the world. Her story must become a beacon of hope for the millions of marginalised children across the world. Co-incidentally, Prism Books Pvt. Ltd., approached me with a proposal to publish a book on Poorna’s life and achievements. I could not have found a better channel to take Poorna to the world. I agreed instantly. Prism assigned the task to Ms. Aparna Thota. When Aparna met me to capture this transformative power of Poorna, for a moment, she looked equally dogged and stubborn, like Poorna.</p>
<p>I consider myself to be a lucky witness to this silent but steady revolution happening in the minds of the marginalised in this part of India. Since the author of this book, Aparna brilliantly takes all of us through the arduous execution of Operation Everest from tiny hamlets in the jungles of Nizamabad in the south of Vindhyas to the mighty peaks of upper Himalayas, I want to focus on why we planned this chilling expedition, putting our reputation on the block.</p>
<p>In the history of social welfare in this country, the policy makers hardly attempted to capture the imagination of their voiceless brethern. I can say this emphatically as I am a product of such a welfare system. Most of the welfare schemes in this country have been, by and large, mere palliative programs that fail to address the crux of the problem. Operation Everest is one such effort not only to remove mental barriers, but also to unlock the infinite potential of the oppressed in the world. </p>
<p>Poverty alleviation programs have largely been based on a top down model – ‘I know what is good for you and you will have to follow this to get out of poverty’. This approach worked to a great extent and gave some relief to the poor. But this could not create the critical mass of leaders or idols from the communities who could lead the change on their own. Even if it was done, it was half hearted and the so called idols created were recklessly stereotyped, stigmatised, and allowed to fade away. The Twitter post on English language of Hima Das, the girl from Assam who clinched gold medal in International Athletic Meet in 2018 is a sad reflection of the stigma toward these underserved sections. Poorna and Anand and many others are no exception to this trend.</p>
<p>In Social Welfare in Telugu states, the policy makers and legendary bureaucrats like S.R. Sankaran, P.S. Krishnan, Madhava Rao, K. Raju clearly wanted to come out of this indefinite pessimism from day one. Operation Everest is one such step in that direction. We wanted the communities that produce such wonder kids to celebrate every moment of glory, however trivial it may be. </p>
<p>Telugu governments realised very early that providing mere reservations to the oppressed sections in the government sector in a globalised era, is not enough. In fact, they went beyond and started preparing their children for entry into those niche sectors from which the poor have been historically excluded. I thank the governments profusely for helping us play a role in this endeavour. But it wasn’t easy.</p>
<p>I am working in the Social Welfare Department by choice. I am the first cop to head this department in our state, which is usually headed by the officers of Indian Administrative Service. Since it was not common, a few well meaning bureaucrats convinced the Chief Ministers of the day to give me a chance. I thank both the Chief Ministers for their generosity and bold vision. Since I had to learn everything from scratch, I focused more on field trips rather than file pushing. My rendezvous with reality was a shocking experience. Many children realised for the first time, that there is a Secretary who is supposed to take care of their needs. There was a huge trust deficit among parents and teachers. Around half of the teachers whom I met, had never seen the head of their department. With the average tenure of previous secretaries being 6 to 8 months, it is not very difficult to imagine what kind of foundations one could have laid for the future of the poor children.</p>
<p>But I was determined to reverse this in the precious two year tenure given to me. Since I had no time, I wanted to do things differently with greater speed. I scrambled everyday for that turning point. Thanks to Mr. Raymond Peter, our the then Principal Secretary, I happened to meet Sekhar Babu, the unassuming mountaineer and this encounter changed the trajectory of all our lives forever. The phenomenal transformation in our lives post Poorna’s summit has been described in a granular detail by the author in this book.</p>
<p>Aparna painstakingly captured the adventure behind the adventure. She patiently collected first hand accounts of everyone who was instrumental in this operation including those who coached our children in the Himalayan Mountaineering Institute located in Darjeeling, West Bengal. This is an expedition of another kind for this debutant author who tried her best to encapsulate what her protagonist had to do to prove the Swaero’s first Commandment:  <strong>I am not inferior to anyone</strong>.</p>
<p>As I described earlier, Poorna’s expedition was launched not to break records, but to break the mental barriers of the poor in their journey towards liberation. This expedition filled the hearts of many kind hearted, but gritty bureaucrats and students with so much confidence that after this feat, many students from interior forests of neighbouring states made it to the summit of Everest. This expedition triggered such a powerful chain reaction that this year in Telangana, around 150  students cruised their way to prestigious medical colleges and 530 students qualifying JEE Mains to join prestigious colleges of technology in this country. This has never happened in 35 years of our existence!</p>
<p>This book must be read by parents and children and the policy makers who want to tap the innate human potential. Poorna’s adventure changed my life. It injected me with tons of fresh energy and confidence. Telangana Government gave me extraordinary stability in this assignment. Even Poorna’s life underwent tremendous change. She continues to challenge the highest peaks in all the continents to tell us, with the same humility, that there is no limit to human potential, whether you are born rich or poor. All that one needs is just an opportunity.</p>
<p>Such opportunities again knocked the gates of social welfare school in Vijayapuri South in 2017. This time it was Sandhya Bai, a 12th grader from the same school (the school I described in the beginning) and daughter of farm labourers, who grabbed the opportunity to set her foot on the peak of Mount Everest. Poorna’s achievement inspired this girl and she was one among those six hundred children who said yes to Everest in 2014. Government of Andhra Pradesh and my counterpart in Andhra Pradesh, Col. Ramulu made this possible. And now it is your turn to grab the next opportunity.</p>
<p>May Mother Nature be with you in every step on the way to your various Summits.</p>
<p><strong>Dr. R.S. Praveen Kumar, IPS.</strong><br />Secretary, TSWREIS, Hyderabad.</p>
<p class="text-right">11 July 2019</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
