<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000f">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Publisher’s Note</h1>
		<p>It is with great pleasure and pride that we present ‘POORNA’ to the world. We are very excited and happy to creatively portray Poorna’s meteoric rise from Pakala to Mouth Everest. Poorna’s is an inspiring story of grit and determination; a narrative of perseverance, endurance and patience. Her feat is a result of her single-minded focus. </p>
		<p>Ms. Aparna Thota has done a commendable job in visualizing the entire journey of Poorna, recording with immense dedication, every travail and triumph. We appreciate the time and effort that she has invested in painstakingly interviewing all the people who were involved in Poorna’s  journey to give us a comprehensive account of her achievement. Aparna  has indeed made the book engaging and fascinating.</p>
		<p>Shubha Srikanth, a seasoned editor, took the book to greater heights, by giving it coherence and lucidity with her editorial and creative skills. </p>
		<p>Poorna’s life is an inspiration for the younger generation that in today’s  world is deprived of genuine role models and heroes. We strongly believe that this book will motivate adults and youngsters alike, to aspire for rich experiences that bring long-lasting joy, while adding valuable dimensions to their personality. </p>
		<p>This book would not have been possible without the wholehearted support and encouragement of Dr. R.S. Praveen Kumar, IPS, who not only instantly agreed to our proposal to bring out Poorna’s accomplishment, but also guided us from start to end. We are grateful to him. We thank TSWREIS for providing us with high-resolution photographs of the various phases of Poorna’s training and ascent. </p>
		<p>Prism is thankful to all those who have helped in different ways in the making of this book.</p>
		<p>Enjoy reading and experience the sheer immensity of the Himalayas and the remarkable triumph of this young girl, Poorna Malavath. </p>
		<p>Happy Reading. </p>
		<p><strong>Pranesh Siravara</strong></p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
