<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000g">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">About the Author</h1>
<p>Aparna Thota is a postgraduate in Social Work, a writer and a poet, Urban lifestyles, struggles of marginalized people and the nuances of everyday life find expression in her works. Through her characters, she sifts through the layers of human emotions and the driving forces within and around. In her stories, she unconditionally supports women and their choices to grow beyond the boundaries prescribed for them.</p>
<p>Poorna is her first biographical work as a novelist. She has embraced the story of Poorna as her own. This book is an expression of her love to all those girls who refuse to compromise on what they are offered and relentlessly fight their way through oppression and discrimination:</p>
<p>‘Every success story of a person is an inspiration and a hope for the rest of society. Poorna might not have been aware of her place in the social hierarchy when she started her humble journey from a remote hamlet. Her conquest of Mount Everest, is a gigantic leap in the history of silenced sections of our country.’ </p>
<p>Poorna has compelled us to pause and record this historic event and Aparna Thota has succeeded in capturing the journey beautifully.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
