<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000i">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Prologue</h1>
		<p><strong>Sagarmatha!</strong></p>
		<p>Here, I am, on top of the world. </p>
		<p>The universe cheers for me. The sky bejewelled with stars is my gorgeous crown. Take me into your arms, for I have come all the way only to meet you. Mother, hug me and kiss me. </p>
		<p>My glory will remain embedded in your bosom forever like a fossil.</p>
		<p>Like a mother who proudly shows her newborn for all to see, uphold me to show me to your brothers and sisters. Tell them, Mother, how adorable I am! Proclaim to the world that this girl is your precious offspring. This girl born to an almost forgotten tribe down South, amidst the sweltering heat of the plateau, travelled all the way, climbed dangerous mountains, crossed corpses, to meet her mother, her epitome of strength!</p>
		<p>I have come all the way for you, my Mother.</p>
		<p>I have come Mother, to be cradled by you. </p>
		<p>I am humbled Mother, in the knowledge that earth and mankind are but an invisible, insignificant, dispensable speck in the larger scheme of the eternal universe. We are ephemeral; the universe is permanent. </p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>Hail  <em>Swaeroes</em>! Look, the sky is NOT our limit. Love is in the air. Grit is our strength; energy is our determination, and endurance, our forgivingness. There is fire in you; stoke it; keep it raging. </p>
		<p>Keep climbing. Hold on to the rope of hope. Wear gears of esteem. Work out to acclimatize, create your own sphere for our destination is our goal. </p>
		<p><em>Sagarmatha</em>, here I go. To send my brothers and sisters who are left behind in primeval times to commence their own voyage toward new horizons, a voyage for progress and dignity.</p>
		<p>A voyage like my own.</p>
		<p>When I can, you can, all of us can!!</p>
		<p><strong>Poorna Malavath</strong></p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
