<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000j">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Gorgeous But Treacherous</h1>
<p><strong>18 April 2014<br />6.45 am<br />The Mount Everest</strong></p>
<p><strong>I</strong>t is not a normal day. Although it appears like one.</p>
<p>The sun rose in the East; the winds caressed with the usual tenderness. </p>
<p>On such a not-so-normal day, the rays of the Sun kissed the mountains of the Himalayan range, one after another: the highest peak, the Summit point of the Everest (8,850 meters), second highest, the Karakoram or K2 (8,611 meters), the third highest Kanchenjunga (8,586 meters) the fourth, Lhotse (8,516 meters) and all the other peaks scattered around the Everest, shimmered gloriously. One after another. As if set to a brilliant, invisible algorithm!</p>
<p>Mount Everest, upon glimpsing the Sun, blushed; transformed from the dull, drab grey of the limestone, and donned a mantle  of splendid gold. Encouraged, the Sun generously sprinkled its golden dust on all the hundreds of mountains, one by one, each with its own characteristic height, gradient and affability. The mountains then cast off their gilded crests offered by the Sun to don their silver crests. The daily saga had just begun. </p>
<p>However, the mystic routine of the mountains did not end in this splendid course of nature. Nature chose otherwise. </p>
<p>The cosmic rhythm was to be wrecked. An infinitesimal crack on the mighty Himalayas was all it took.</p>
<p>The large unstable blocks of ice softened and loosened during day and hardened and tightened during the nights. It all started with a micro movement in the western shoulder of the Everest. </p>
<p>Micro inch by micro inch, the crack travelled on the surface as if an invisible dagger had carved it out. It travelled at monstrous speed, sketching a menacing fissure on the vast mountain canvas. A massive Serac of 34.5 meters on the western shoulder ripped off the mountain.</p>
<p>The 113 feet thick Serac weighing 14.3 million kilograms, quietly separated itself from Mount Everest, like a slice of orange gently pulled out of the fruit. The last connect broken, it accelerated at lightning speed, sliding down with irrepressible energy, devouring everything on its way.</p>
<p>An Avalanche on a seemingly ordinary day!</p>
<p>The avalanche descended rapidly to hit right below Camp 1 (5,800 meters), passed through the Khumbu icefall, speeding, dropping, sliding and maneuvering its way amidst the tresses of the mountain, diverting and changing tracks. Every element  on the mountain surrenders to the </SPAN>avalanche. What choice does it have in the face of elemental fury? </p>
<p>The millions of tons of rapidly sliding ice came to a standstill in a few seconds.</p>
<p>Was it tired? Or was it content? </p>
<p>Content, perhaps for it had devoured twenty-five human lives. </p>
<p>Every mountain will one day collapse. A mountain is in the making for thousands and thousands of centuries. Large parts of the earth move and collide with land forms to form Fold Mountains. The mountain randomly sheds a minute piece of itself, a display of its incredible malevolent power!</p>
<p>To remind man of his fallibility! Of his transience!</p>
<p>Everest is mystic but dangerous!</p>
<p>Gorgeous but treacherous!</p>
<p>Everest, the assassin!</p>
<p>Everest, the God of all mountains.</p>
<p>Mount Everest, the highest eight-thousander!</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
