<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-001">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">The Flitting Butterfly</h1>
		<p><strong>30 August 2013<br />4.30 pm<br />Social Welfare Residential School, Tadwai</strong></p>
<p><strong>I</strong>t’s almost evening, but the sun is still bright and blinding. Girls with tightly plaited hair, tied with red ribbons and dressed in checked shirts and maroon skirts are standing under the luxurious canopy of a huge tree in the volleyball court of their school playground. They are looking up, craning their necks and searching for something among the overhanging branches. </p>
<p>‘There she is!’ someone yelled, pointing at a small figure that appeared momentarily amidst the broad-leaved branches.</p>
<p>‘Poornaaa,’ one of them shouted. </p>
<p>An instant later, the girls got a clear glimpse of Poorna on the sunshade of their classroom, next to the tree. She was gliding up toward the parapet wall with the help of the ventilator sill. No, she did not hoist herself to the terrace. Instead, with one hand on the parapet wall, she pushed herself back to catch hold of a sturdy tree branch and stretched out her other hand, to reach the ball on a leaved branch. As she took a swing, with her left hand, she tapped the ball from above. The ball lazily jostled against the leaves and fell to the ground with a soft thud. Poorna’s legs were still on the ventilator sill. With one hand clutching the parapet wall, she carefully landed on the sunshade and leapt toward another sturdy branch. She crawled down and jumped from the trunk. She dusted her skirt and picked up the ball, swirled it precariously perched on her forefinger and headed toward the volleyball court, a big smile lighting up her face. </p>
<p>The girls took their positions on the court. Poorna stepped into the service zone. Her upper body bent slightly forward, she held the ball in her outstretched left hand, tossed it into the air and hit it with great force toward the other court. Another teammate jumped high and spiked the ball with precision into a gap. </p>
<p>‘GOAL!!’ the girls shouted. </p>
<p>Swapna blew the whistle and marked a point.</p>
<p>This was not the first time that Poorna gained a point or retrieved the ball during a match. A swift, high throw often landed the ball on tree branches or on terraces of the school buildings. Poorna would be the only one to recover the ball, no matter where the ball landed. Even before Swapna realised, Poorna would climb a tree effortlessly and leap from branch to branch; hoist herself from window sill to window bar; or scurry up rainwater and drainage pipes. She would create access where none existed. Swapna enjoyed watching her dark, lean structure climb, leap and slide down with ease. Today, as she watched Poorna play, she knew who she would recommend for the mountaineering course. That morning she had received an email circular from the Secretary of Social Welfare Residential Schools asking her to recommend two students for a rock-climbing camp. </p>
<p>Swapna and Poorna joined the Government Social Welfare Residential School of Tadwai three years ago. It was Swapna’s first job after completing the Bachelor of Physical Education (B.P.Ed course). Swapna found Poorna, who joined the sixth grade, receptive, responsible and highly energetic. She was also good at sports. They developed a warm bond. Swapna often sought Poorna’s assistance, especially during matches and tournaments. </p>
<p>Poorna was an outstanding volleyball player and had steered the school team to win several zonal matches. Poorna’s power and agility on the court, her precision in aiming the ball at a weak opponent or a gap had Swapna proudly declare to the headmistress, ‘Madam, give me Poorna and two other players. We’ll win any volleyball tournament!’</p>
<p>The next day Swapna sent word to Poorna asking her to meet her at the sports inventory room.</p>
<p>‘Poorna, I’ve got this email from the Secretary of Social Welfare Residential Schools asking me to select two students for a rock-climbing camp. Ravali from Intermediate First Year has agreed to go. We need one from Ninth standard. Do you want to go?’ She said, raising her eyebrow.</p>
<p>‘Rock climbing? What’s that?’ Poorna asked, taking the ball from the  <em>almirah</em>.</p>
<p>‘It is a sport Poorna. You will be taught how to climb steep rocks with ropes and other equipment.’</p>
<p>Without a second thought, Poorna said, ‘I’ll go. I am used to climbing the hills around my village.’</p>
<p>‘Sure? But the camp is scheduled during holidays.’</p>
<p>‘Holidays? Oh no, please, Madam! I want to go home. Plan it earlier. Please?’</p>
<p>‘No, silly. I am not the one who decides. The Secretary does. Besides, the camp is at Bhongir. About a hundred students from different schools will participate in the camp. This is a rare opportunity Poorna. I want you to go!’ </p>
<p>‘How long is the camp?’</p>
<p>‘Five days – 30th September to 4th October. So, tell me. Shall I recommend your name for the camp?’</p>
<p>‘Yes, madam.’ Poorna twirled the ball on her forefinger. ‘Now, how about this?’ she pointed to the ball.</p>
<p>‘Let’s start marking at 3 o’ clock.’ Swapna took the ball from Poorna’s hands. ‘You may now go back to class.’</p>
<p>Poorna pulled a long face and ran out.</p>
<p>Swapna locked the sports room and headed toward the principal’s office. </p>
<p>‘Did she agree?’ Dhanalakshmi, the principal asked. </p>
<p>‘Yes, madam.’</p>
<p>‘And the inter first-year girl, Ravali?’</p>
<p>‘She is willing too.’ </p>
<p>Ravali was a State-level wrestling champion in the Under-Seventeen Category.</p>
<p>‘Are you sure of these two girls?’</p>
<p>‘Yes, Madam.’</p>
<p>Swapna beamed with pride. Ravali and Poorna had evolved into fine sports-persons under her tutelage. </p>
<p>She called Mannan, the Sports Officer. </p>
<p>‘Sir, we’ll send two students. I’ll mail their details by noon. Alright, Sir,’ she said as she scribbled in her diary – ‘Medical Fitness Certificate and Non-Judicial Agreement’. ‘I’ll arrange for these, Sir. I’ll upload the scanned copies while submitting the form online.’</p>
<p>She made the next call to Poorna’s father, Devidas. </p>
<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
<p><em>Mountaineering sounds interesting. Wish they had planned the camp during school days. </em>Thought Poorna. She would really miss going home.</p>
<p>Poorna’s father, who had visited her the previous week, had mentioned that during the upcoming Dussehra vacation, her uncle would stay with them longer than usual. For a moment, she regretted her decision to attend the camp. She loved her uncle’s children! The younger was born just three years ago when she had joined the school at Tadwai. Besides, she missed her parents and was eager to go home. </p>
<p>The thought of her parents brought to her mind images of them working relentlessly, all day long. Her father, Devidas, riding his bicycle to and fro from Pakala to Kondapur, to attend to routine electrical repair work; busy in the farm, culling out weeds; or, at other times, fixing a chair or the  <em>navvar</em> (cot made by weaving long strip of thick cloth on an wooden frame) in the front yard of the house. Poorna clung to her father whenever she was home for the holidays. She enjoyed helping him in whatever he did and learned by observing him. Before Poorna joined the school at Tadwai, her whole family would go to the nearby forest to collect  <em>ippa poolu</em> (Mahuva flowers) and  <em>beedi aakulu </em>(tobacco leaves). A set of hundred  <em>beedi aakulu </em>fetched them no more than a rupee, and they made  <em>ippa saara</em> (hooch liquor) with  <em>ippa poolu</em>.</p>
<p>Devidas hailed from the Banjara community. His ancestors had migrated from Rajasthan and had somehow created a niche at Pakala, more a hamlet than a village, in Kamareddy district. When the joint family split, Devidas was left with just one acre of land. When he realized he couldn’t make both ends meet if he depended on this meager piece of land, he decided to learn a new skill that could be another source of income. He knew that there was a great demand for electricians. The farmers of the neighbouring hamlets called for an electrician when the bore-well engine fused out, and that happened very  often because of constant power fluctuations. Devidas decided to learn to be an electrician. On days when the farm did not require his labour, he cycled to Kondapur, a small town near Pakala, to learn what it takes to be an electrician.</p>
<p>The residents of Pakala had another option: to go to the Gulf countries. However, Devidas was sure he would not want to do  that. He knew of friends and relatives who, through brokers,  had struggled to clinch a job in the Gulf. Once there, they didn’t mind doing any odd job, be it scavenging or construction labour. The women ended up as housemaids or nannies. The early days after the son of the household migrated seemed hopeful to the family. They exulted over small gifts, sent through a friend or relative, that usually included clothes,  electric trimmers, soaps and perfumes and not to mention the customary dates. The first visit back home for him was only after five years. This grand visit would sink the family into a financial crisis because of needs that were waiting to be met and the obligation to bring gifts. The wife became pregnant again; the mother’s long-pending surgery couldn’t be put off anymore; a brother wanted to start a business; a sister had to be married off and so on. The family would now owe more to the money lender than ever before. And so, he journeys back to the foreign land, to work harder. </p>
<p>Devidas found this whole saga meaningless. He would often tell his wife, ‘I’ll never send my children to a foreign land. The Gulf – a mirage! Succeed or fail they may, but here, in this land.’</p>
<p>Despite their poverty, Devidas and Lakshmi were determined to educate their children and dreamt of a better future for them. Devidas not only dreamt but planned and worked toward making his dream come true. He invested in educating his children. He encouraged them to study. He knew that education and employment were the only means to prevent them from being sucked into the throes of poverty.</p>
<p>An acre of land and a cycle were the family’s only inherited properties. They did not even have a house of their own after the joint family split. Devidas and Lakshmi worked relentlessly and built a hut to sleep and an extended thatch for a functioning kitchen.</p>
<p>Poorna did not remember precisely when, but the desire for education had embedded itself deeply in her mind. One hot summer night, when all of them sat outside their hut gazing at the clear star-lit sky, Poorna had asked her parents if they had ever studied in a school. No, said her father. Two of Devidas’s younger brothers were the only ones who had gone to school. They were the first generation who had had some formal education. Poorna’s mother was sent to school, with a  <em>penku </em>(a clay tava, that doubled as a slate) and chalk. She was often beaten by her teacher, and so she hated school. On her way back home, she would break the  <em>penku,</em> hoping her parents would not send her to school. But, she would promptly be given a new one the same evening. She went back each day and broke the  <em>penku</em> with a vengeance. After some days, her wish was fulfilled. She was stopped from going to school and was asked to graze cattle.</p>
<p>Poorna and her brother Naresh, loved to listen to their mother’s school misadventure story. They would laugh till their tummies hurt. Then, Lakshmi would gently, lovingly take Poorna’s and Naresh’s hands into hers, and whisper, ‘Never, be like us. Let this poverty end with us. You must study and get government jobs. Your children’s hands must be soft and clean, and their heels, always smooth. You must never live under a leaky roof hoping and praying that it survives the monsoon. You should always have enough to eat and share.’ Tears trickled down Lakshmi’s cheeks as she said these words.</p>
<p>Poorna admired her mother immensely. Lakshmi spent her time mostly between the kitchen and the farm. Poorna had never heard her mother complain or whine. She had learned to make the most of what was available and ran the house efficiently. She made  <em>ambli</em> (porridge) out of  <em>jonna</em> (jowar) or  <em>ragi </em>(millet) when there was no rice at home. She was a  lever, smoothly supporting her husband’s dreams for a better future. </p>
<p>After a hard day’s labour, watching his daughter skip, hop and jump around was a treat for Devidas. He loved her every antic and every tantrum. He would hoist her on his shoulders and run around the house. The house would be filled with their laughter. Lakshmi felt blessed at such times. As Poorna grew, Devidas admired her even more. Poorna was a wild butterfly, flitting here and there. Devidas never controlled her. He wanted her to deal with life, as it came, independently. Poorna was sent to a nearby Anganwadi centre. She would escape from the centre and run to her mother working in the fields. She was then admitted to the local primary school, a furlong away from her house. She enjoyed going to school. Devidas saw a sprightly, curious child in Poorna. </p>
<p>One day, she found her big brother, Naresh riding her father’s cycle – the one that Devidas had inherited from his father. This old bicycle was his only mode of transport to neighbouring villages. Poorna watched her brother struggle to cycle. After two days of effort, he finally learned to balance and peddle. She wanted to give it a try. Ten-year-old Naresh refused to part with the cycle. She tried negotiating by tempting him with toffees. He pushed her away. Not one to give up easily, she started beating him. Naresh relented. He knew she wouldn’t budge until she got what she wanted. </p>
<p>Within no time, Poorna learnt to cycle. She wasn’t tall enough to sit on the seat and peddle. She put one leg through the V-shaped gap below the cycle bar to reach the pedal and roamed around the whole village. Every time she was losing balance, she would loudly chant,  <em>‘Jai Hanuman! Jai Hanuman!’</em>. She believed that she always grew stronger after chanting  <em>Jai Hanuman</em>. She visited the Hanuman temple next to her house every day. Hanuman, the lord of strength, helped her overcome all her fears. </p>
<p>‘<em>Tu padgi tho</em>…? (What if you fall?)’ Naresh asked, genuinely concerned. </p>
<p>‘<em>Ma jaavu tho</em>…? (What if I don’t?)’ </p>
<p>She peddled away toward her friend’s house on the other side of the village.</p>
<p>Poorna was adamant about one thing. She loved challenging herself to push the limits of her physical abilities and strength.  She wouldn’t stop until she overcame the hurdles while learning a new skill. She was a determined soul. Once an idea or thought came to her mind, she would pursue it until she put it into action. </p>
<p>When her primary school teacher had asked the children of the class what they wanted to become when they grew up, Poorna had thought hard. She finally decided that she wanted to become a policewoman. The power, fear, risk and challenges attached to that uniform excited her. During one of her cycling escapades, she suddenly spotted a policewoman in the neighbourhood. Her heart skipped a beat, and her legs began to tremble. She dropped her cycle and rushed into her house. She hid next to a trunk and waited for a while with her eyes closed. She believed that the uniformed policewoman was there to arrest her and perhaps put her behind bars. After a long time, she gathered the courage to step out and heaved a sigh of relief when she found no trace of the policewoman. Later, she found out that the policewoman in  <em>khaki</em> dress was none other than her neighbour Uma  <em>akka </em>(elder sister), dressed in the NCC uniform given by her school.</p>
<p>Poorna was a bold and courageous girl. Her parents were simple, straightforward people who knew no guile. She had imbibed from them a sense of righteousness. Except for the police, she feared nothing. She believed that if she was right, then there’s nothing to fear. Naresh, the little lad, worried for her when she fought fiercely for what she wanted and for what she considered right. Once, she fought girls much older than her for a skipping rope. After some verbal exchange, the girls gave her the skipping rope and walked away. </p>
<p>Naresh was amused. ‘Poorna, aren’t you scared? You fight with big girls.’</p>
<p>‘Why should I be? I am not wrong. I told them that I wanted the rope after they finished. They were teasing me,’ she said and started skipping. </p>
<p>Education for most children came to a halt after primary school in Pakala, unless parents were willing to and could afford to send their children to the tribal hostel at Kamareddy. Devidas, however, applied to the Social Welfare Residential School at Tadwai in Nizamabad district, on the advice of Ravi, the local primary school teacher, and a distant relative. Qualifying applications were chosen through a lottery. Days passed with no intimation from the school. Devidas wasn’t prepared to take a chance. He admitted Poorna to the Tribal Welfare Hostel at Kamareddy, 45 kilometres from Pakala.</p>
<p>Poorna still remembers how she had sobbed the night away. The hostel was a shabby single room with a dilapidated toilet at the other end of the compound. There were only ten girls in the hostel. The school was almost two kilometres from the hostel, and the girls had to cover the distance by foot. The food was awful. Poorna cried every night and prayed that her parents would take her home from this wretched place. She didn’t mind quitting studies altogether or pleading her primary school teacher to accommodate her for one more year, but she would never stay in this ghastly place.</p>
<p>Devidas arrived at the end of two weeks. He announced that out of all the six girls who had applied to the Social Welfare Residential School, Poorna was the lucky one. He admitted her to the school in Tadwai. Poorna took an instant liking to this school. The teachers were knowledgeable; the premises was clean and tidy, and the food was scrumptious. What more could she ask for? </p>
<p><em>What if I hadn’t won the lottery? What if I was forced to stay there?</em> She often wondered.</p>
<p>To this day, she shudders when she remembers the few days she spent at Kamareddy tribal hostel.</p>
<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
<p>After lunch, Swapna went to the administration office, a small room adjacent to the principal’s chamber. The clerk greeted her with a smile. The only computer in the school was placed here. It was also connected to the internet. She requested the clerk cum computer operator to open a particular website. She sat at the computer and keyed in the details on the online form.</p>
<table>
<tr>
<th>Student name</th>
<th>Class</th>
<th>Age </th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Ravali M</td>
<td>Inter Ist year</td>
<td>16 years</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Poorna Malavath</td>
<td>Class 9 A</td>
<td>13 years</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>Swapna hit the ENTER key. She would not have imagined that her action would one day create history.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
