<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-002">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">The Touch of Rocks</h1>
<p><strong>30 September 2013<br />6.30 am<br />Bhongir</strong></p>
<p><strong>S</strong>he felt that the rock was watching her keenly; assessing her worth.</p>
<p><em>One single rock! So steep, almost vertical. How do you ever climb a vertical rock?</em></p>
<p>She looked at the rock from different angles. </p>
<p><em>The surface of this rock is as smooth as butter. </em></p>
<p>She imagined climbing the rock. It seemed a formidable task.</p>
<p><em>I have never seen such a huge rock around my village. </em></p>
<p>A sharp whistle shook her from her thoughts. </p>
<p>‘Girls! Fall into five rows. Maintain one arm distance. Make it faster,’ Parmesh, the trainer ordered. </p>
<p>There were a few sloppy moves in the group. ‘NOW!’ he yelled.</p>
<p>The girls quickly fell into five rows.</p>
<p>‘That’s better,’ he mumbled.</p>
<p>‘Good morning!’</p>
<p>‘Good morning, Sir’ a feeble response was all he received.</p>
<p>‘<em>Arey bhai, jaranta energy to cheppunri</em>! (Show some energy!) GOOD MORNING!’</p>
<p>‘Good morning, Sir!’ They shouted in unison. </p>
<p>‘Good-morning!’ </p>
<p>‘Good-morning, Sir,’ the sharp response pierced the morning breeze.</p>
<p>‘Excellent! One last time. GOOD MORNING!’</p>
<p>‘GOOD MORNING, SIR!’ Pat came the reply. Their reflexes had been activated. </p>
<p>Parmesh’s energy was infectious. Sekhar Babu, the founder of ‘Transcend Adventures’, a rock climbing training school, had roped in Parmesh as a trainer. Parmesh, in fact, had trained Sekhar Babu in rock climbing. After being trained by Parmesh, Sekhar Babu followed Parmesh’s footsteps and got himself certified by the Himalayan Mountaineering Institute (HMI). After a few years, he established ‘Transcend Adventures’ and hired Parmesh as a trainer. Together, they began to conduct annual rock climbing camps for school children. They intended to pass on the art and technique of mountaineering to the younger generation, to kindle interest and invoke passion for mountaineering.</p>
<p>Parmesh scanned the group again. He saw one girl out of line. ‘ <em>Eh ladki! Teekh se khado.</em>’ <em> </em>(Fall into the line.) </p>
<p>Poorna quickly fell in line.</p>
<p>‘Introduce yourselves.’</p>
<p>One by one, the girls introduced themselves. Poorna tried to memorize the names, in vain. The voices began to drown. Soon, her focus narrowed down to the enormous, solitary rock that stood majestically before her eyes. She scanned the entire length of the rope that hung from atop the hill down to the ground. A seat was attached to the rope. A tall, fair, lean man sat on it, held the rope and started to climb the rock with ease and finesse.</p>
<p><em>What would it take to climb this rock!!? What if I fall?</em></p>
<p>Before she realized, it was her turn to introduce herself. </p>
<p>‘Poorna Malavath, 9th Class, Tadwai School.’</p>
<p>She shouted and turned to her right, indicating the next girl to take over. </p>
<p><em>This puny thing must be the youngest of all, </em>Parmesh thought.  <em>Can she measure up to the challenge?</em></p>
<p>He decided to wait and watch. He was not one to jump to conclusions.</p>
<p>Parmesh asked the respective PETs to take the girls for a run, while he sorted the equipment. </p>
<p>After the run, Poorna stood in the queue for breakfast. </p>
<p>‘Only two idlis?’ Sekhar Babu asked, peering into her plate. ‘Have more. You have a long day ahead.’ </p>
<p>Poorna smiled sheepishly but did not go for a second helping.</p>
<p>Parmesh summoned the girls after breakfast. He asked the PETs to take attendance.</p>
<p>Sekhar Babu headed toward the rope, while Parmesh addressed the girls.</p>
<p>‘Do you know why you are here?’</p>
<p>‘Yes, Sir.’</p>
<p>‘Why?’ he asked, pointing at Poorna. </p>
<p>‘Sir, to learn to climb this rock.’</p>
<p>‘Do you want to?’</p>
<p>‘Yes, Sir,’ the girls yelled.</p>
<p>‘Great! You are interested and motivated. A positive mindset is essential to learn a new skill.’</p>
<p>Pointing to the rock, he said, ‘This rock is five hundred and fifty feet high. We will ascend only three hundred and fifty feet. Rock climbing is one of the most adventurous sport. You must be wondering what you will gain out of this sport.’</p>
<p>‘Strength,’ said one girl.</p>
<p>‘Concentration,’ said another.</p>
<p>‘Yes, physical stamina, emotional balance and more importantly, you will discover yourselves.’</p>
<p><em>How do you discover yourself by climbing a rock</em>, Poorna wondered.</p>
<p>‘You are a lucky bunch. Very few get such an opportunity at this young age. Will you put in your best efforts?’</p>
<p>‘Yes, Sir.’</p>
<p>‘If you think you are here for an excursion, you may leave immediately. If you do not work hard, you will be sent back without a second thought. Do you follow?’</p>
<p>‘Yes, Sir.’</p>
<p>‘Success and failure are part of learning. If you focus one hundred percent, you will succeed. Observe carefully. Listen attentively. You’ll master the art of climbing this big rock by the end of the course. Otherwise...’ </p>
<p>He gave the group a tough look.</p>
<p>The girls headed toward their respective PETs to collect their gear, which included a pair of climbing shoes. </p>
<p>Sekhar Babu demonstrated the technique of fixing the harness around the waist. He then wore on the helmet and fastened it. He climbed with the help of the rope. His body moved along the surface of the rock as he climbed. Poorna was awestruck! He had climbed the three hundred and fifty feet in a matter of minutes! </p>
<p>He then demonstrated rappelling, the technique of ascending and descending with the help of a rope, a harness and a carabiner. He first locked the rope, harness and carabiner. He held the carabiner in his right hand and applied breaks whenever necessary while ascending. </p>
<p>‘This method is called ‘belaying’,’ he said, and warned the girls, ‘Control over body and speed is very important.’</p>
<p>Parmesh asked Sekhar Babu to demonstrate techniques to balance the body during descent. Sekhar Babu demonstrated how to rappel with speed. He glided down smoothly like a striker on a carrom board.</p>
<p>Parmesh demonstrated ‘speed jumping’ and explained that an experienced mountaineer could rapel down hundreds of feet with ease and speed.</p>
<p>‘During this course, you will hear me mention several technical terms. I’ll explain a few of them now. Listen carefully,’ Parmesh said, and continued,</p>
<p>‘Pinch hold – holding on to the grip in a pinching style. </p>
<p>Three-point technique – while climbing, all the three limbs are  on the rock.</p>
<p>Bucket hold – a full grip of the rock using the whole palm and fingers.</p>
<p>Side-cut hold – holding the rock from the grips available on the sides.</p>
<p>Undercut hold – holding the rock with the grips available under the cracks. </p>
<p>Friction or pressure hold – the climber applies friction on the rock with a full palm.’</p>
<p>The first batch of five girls was ready to go.</p>
<p>‘Use your toes and fingers to get a grip in the crevices and edges of the rock,’ said Parmesh.</p>
<p>He demonstrated how to place the foot on the rock edge or in a crevice and said, ‘As much of the foot as possible must find a place on the rock for maximum balance while climbing down.’</p>
<p>Parmesh said, ‘Start climbing. Let your instincts guide you. Make friends with the rock. Bond with the rock. Now remove your mittens and start.’</p>
<p>‘Ready with your equipment?’</p>
<p>‘Yes, Sir.’</p>
<p>A sudden hush descended on the ground. The morning sun was moving higher up in the sky. </p>
<p>‘Ready?’ Parmesh’s voice echoed against the huge rock.</p>
<p>‘YES, SIR.’</p>
<p>Parmesh blew the whistle, and the students ran toward the rock. Poorna ran enthusiastically, letting go of all her fears. </p>
<p>She managed to take two steps and struggled for grip. </p>
<p>‘Aghh...!!!’ She fell. </p>
<p>Her palms were bruised. She pulled herself on to her feet. Dusting her pants, she noticed that only Roja  <em>akka </em>had made some progress. </p>
<p>Poorna turned toward the rock and glued her eyes on it. She resolved <em>.</em></p>
<p><em>I will climb this!</em></p>
<p>She took a deep breath and muttered, ‘ <em>Jai Hanuman!</em>’</p>
<p>Poorna’s little fingers searched for cracks on the rock surface; some grip that she could latch on to. She found a crack. She gripped her fingers in the crack and hoisted herself two steps. Another grip and she moved up another two. She searched for another, and she found it. She covered another two steps. Poorna reached out for one more, stretching her hands as far as possible. Her vision was limited to just a few feet of rock spread before her enormously. She reached out to a few more grip points and started crawling upwards, pushing her body against gravity. Sweat trickled down her temples and cheeks. Her moist hands left impressions on the rough rock surface. Poorna pushed herself up relentlessly. </p>
<p>‘Poorna’, she heard Parmesh. She felt a sudden jolt as when woken from a trance. She arched her neck back to look down. She almost lost grip. She turned toward the rock and took a deep breath. </p>
<p>‘That’s enough. Descend now.’</p>
<p>She assessed the situation. She hadn’t moved too high up, but she was high enough to hurt herself if she were to fall. She moved an arm down to find a grip. The descent wasn’t as easy as the ascent. She tried lowering one hand while the other was gripped tightly in a small crack in the rock. She panicked. How would she reach the ground? She tried to get a stronghold with her feet, but they trembled vigorously. </p>
<p>‘Poorna, bring one hand down. Just one…a little lower. Yeah…yeah…right there…you got a grip…good.’ Poorna followed Sekhar Babu’s words.</p>
<p>She managed to climb down and landed safely. She was sweating profusely, and her legs were still trembling.</p>
<p>It took the girls almost an hour to climb and descend from the huge rock.</p>
<p>‘Tell me, which was difficult? Climbing up or climbing down?’ Parmesh asked.</p>
<p>‘Climbing down, Sir,’ Ravali said.</p>
<p>‘You are right. That’s because you have still not mastered the technique of descent. Some of you were so scared that you froze midway. And this girl, shouts and screams for help. Some of you even performed break dance up there.’ The girls giggled.</p>
<p>‘Now, you will learn to balance yourself and your body. You are doing good. Techniques will make you more confident. You will also learn to use rock climbing and mountaineering equipment. Do you know that you have already tried a style of rock climbing?’ He waited for an answer. No one had an answer. </p>
<p>He continued. ‘It is called Traditional Climbing, also called Trad Climbing.’</p>
<p>Parmesh picked up a rope. ‘Remember the rope is a mountaineer’s lifeline. You will learn to make different types of knots. Knots keep the rope intact. You will also learn to coil a rope. These ropes are very long. More than a hundred meters long. Coiling them and keeping them safe is important. On the last day, you will take up practical and theory tests, and appear for a viva. You will be graded based on your performance.’ </p>
<p>He added, ‘This course is specially designed for students of Social Welfare Residential Schools. This is a rare opportunity. This same course for the boys from your schools concluded yesterday. They did very well. Now it is your turn. Are you all ready?’</p>
<p>‘YES, SIR.’ The girls roared.</p>
<p>‘Good. Now I want you to try bouldering. Boulders are rocks that are 10-15 feet high.’</p>
<p>Parmesh led the group to the small boulders scattered around Bhongir rock. Poorna followed right behind him. </p>
<p>Before they could get started, he demonstrated different kinds of hitches. ‘This is the Clove hitch used to tie the rope to the anchor. And this, the Italian hitch, for attaching the carabiner and the belay device to be used while belaying and finally the Girth hitch, for attaching the sling to the harness.’</p>
<p>He then briefed them on how to balance themselves on the rocks.</p>
<p>Poorna held the rope and climbed with confidence, but she found descent difficult. She remembered to keep her legs slightly apart and hold the rope tight. When she landed, her eyes twinkled with a sense of achievement. </p>
<p>As the girls were taking turns, Parmesh noticed Poorna joining the line again for another chance. He signaled Sekhar Babu to keep an eye on her.</p>
<p>Parmesh didn’t fail to notice those eyes; calm, but focused and knowing, like an eagle, waiting for an opportunity.</p>
<p>By the third day, Poorna was comfortable applying the basic techniques of rock climbing. She followed Parmesh’s instructions to the tee, but she was still shy and reserved. Poorna learnt to make knots and hitches in no time. Mother Knot was the simplest of all. She learnt to make the Figure 8 Knot, Square Knot, also called Reef Knot. She especially liked the Fisherman Knot and the Double Fisherman Knot for their exclusive style of locking. Bow Line Knot though was a little tricky, but she learnt it. She also learnt the Middle Man Knot, Guide Man Knot, Friction Knot and End Man Knot. </p>
<p>That evening, the girls lodged at Aleru Social Welfare Residential School, twenty-five kilometers from Bhongir rock. This school remained open even during holidays to board student trainees.</p>
<p>The next day was more interesting. Parmesh picked up each piece of equipment and described its usage and functionality. He also talked about different concepts and terminology associated with mountaineering. The most important technique for top climbing is belaying. The belayer stands on the ground and controls the length and tension of the rope by locking or loosening the rope, which is looped through the anchor at the top. The climber and the belayer coordinate with each other while the climber takes the support of the belay to ascend and descend the rock. As the climber proceeds upward, the belayer pulls the rope to provide sufficient tension. During descent, the belayer releases the rope through the belaying device, also called verso or with another piece of equipment called the descender. </p>
<p>Poorna practised belaying. She locked herself through the carabiner and shouted out as taught, ‘I’m ready for climbing.’</p>
<p>The belayer responded, ‘Climb on.’ </p>
<p>A few steps ahead, she said, ‘Belay tight.’</p>
<p>The belayer pulled the rope to induce tension. </p>
<p>Once she reached the top, she said, ‘I am at the anchor.’</p>
<p>‘Okay,’ she was acknowledged.</p>
<p>While descending, she said, ‘Lower me.’ </p>
<p>The belayer responded, ‘Lowering.’ </p>
<p>On reaching the ground, she said, ‘I am safe.’ </p>
<p>Parmesh told them that the belay rope is the lifeline of climbing when using belay technique, although it is not preferred in high altitudes as the ropes are already fixed for climbers. For great heights as the Everest, they use an equipment called Jumar to ascend and descend and this method is called ‘jumaring’. The Jumar is also called the Ascender and the Descender according to the purpose for which it is used. </p>
<p>The equipment has enormous load bearing capacity. The smallest equipment can take weights starting from 1,200 kg. Poorna connected the concept of ‘breakpoint’ that she had learnt  in her physics class to the breaking point of the equipment. She was surprised that a carabiner could withstand weights upto 2,500 kg when locked and up to 8,000 kg when unlocked. Parmesh encouraged the girls to touch, feel and hold different equipment. Poorna held a Pitton in her hand. She imagined a mountaineer hanging in the air with just the anchored Pitton for support. She looked at it with great respect.</p>
<p><em>Such a tiny piece of equipment! What critical functionality! </em>She thought.</p>
<p>She handed the Pitton back to Sekhar Babu.</p>
<p>Day three was bright and sunny. An incident, both disturbing and motivating occurred during training. Bharathi, a fellow student, rappelled too fast and lost balance. Unable to keep pace, she tumbled over, close to the ground. Despite the secure helmet, she hurt her head. She was bleeding. The girls panicked. Sekhar Babu calmed them and called for a doctor from Bhongir. The doctor said that although the injury was superficial, the skin on the scalp was torn and needed two sutures. She was taken to the clinic. Since anesthesia was not available at the clinic, Bharati took the stitches without local sedation. She did not complain! They returned to the camp site. Sekhar Babu decided to send her home to recuperate. Bharathi began to sob. </p>
<p>‘<em>Nanna, nenu ponu.</em>’ (I don’t want to go back, father.)</p>
<p>Poorna wondered how Bharathi could refer to Parmesh as ‘ <em>Nanna</em>’ (father). </p>
<p>‘I don’t want to go home. I don’t want to miss the training. I want to be here…with my friends and complete the course.’</p>
<p>‘Fine,<em>bidda </em>(child). <em> </em>Stay with us. But you will not climb until you are better. You need to rest now.’</p>
<p>Poorna saw Parmesh in his most kind and endearing form that day. Bharathi and Parmesh had known each other for only these three days.</p>
<p>‘You are a crazy girl! You didn’t cry when you were sutured without anaesthesia, and now you cry because we wanted to send you back?  <em>Pagal ladki! </em>(Crazy girl!). <em> </em>But remember. You will not climb until you are fine.’</p>
<p>Over the next two days, the girls underwent rigorous climbing practice. They used various equipment and practised different techniques. Poorna’s focus was only on devising the best possible method to climb. On the fifth day, the girls took up the practical and theory tests and the viva. They climbed the 350 ft with ease.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
