<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-003">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">The Petite Girl and Her Immense Determination</h1>
		<p><strong>4 October 2013<br />4.30 pm<br />Bhongir</strong></p>
		<p><span class="big-letter">A</span> rustic, makeshift dais was erected for the Valedictory Function. The group of girls and the boys who had trained at Bhongir earlier had assembled. A big black car cruised into the Aleru Social Welfare Residential School campus. Poorna couldn’t get a clear view of the people who alighted. Sekhar Babu, Parmesh and principals from a few welfare schools flanked the car. After the customary handshakes and exchange of pleasantries, Poorna noticed a  well-built figure approach them. </p>
		<p><em>Ah! That must be Mr. Praveen Kumar IPS! Thought Poorna.</em></p>
		<p>Till this day, Poorna had no idea that her school was part of the Social Welfare Residential Schools of Andhra Pradesh (now bifurcated into Telangana and Andhra Pradesh). She was eager to see the official who headed all the schools: Secretary, Dr. R.S. Praveen Kumar, IPS, ( <em>The Secretary of Social Welfare Residential Schools</em>) Chief Guest of the Valedictory function.</p>
		<p>His pace was brisk. Poorna hadn’t seen anyone walk with such confidence and self-assurance. His shadow fell on Poorna as he walked past her. She joined her hands in applause along with the other children. Deevena, one of the participants of the camp, stepped forward to offer him a bouquet. </p>
		<p>The sternness of his features disappeared for a moment, and a warm smile lit his face as he said, ‘Thank you!’</p>
		<p>Poorna found his smile affable. </p>
		<p>His tall, chiseled frame and tonsured head stood him apart from the crowd. But his dark complexion made him one among them. He smiled at some, greeted others and nodded in acknowledgement. For a few moments, he looked at the massive Bhongir rock spread before him. </p>
		<p>He turned around and said, ‘Wonderful! So, all of you have climbed this rock!’</p>
		<p>‘Yes, Sir. 350 ft,’ they shouted.</p>
		<p>His smile gradually broadened and turned into a light chuckle.</p>
		<p>Sekhar Babu formally welcomed the Chief Guest.</p>
		<p>The children listened to the Chief Guest’s speech with rapt attention. </p>
		<p>‘You are little bundles of unlimited energy. Did you ever imagine that you could climb this rock? Never! Right? Well, now you have climbed this steep rock. That means you can climb any mountain. You can reach any mountain. You can reach any height. Man has reached the moon. Can you imagine that? The world laughed when it first heard that man would travel to the moon. But man reached the Moon nevertheless. You would have laughed if you were told that you could climb a steep rock, 350 feet high. Here you are! Proud that you have accomplished the task! How did you climb? Not because you had the climbing equipment. Not because you learnt the techniques of climbing. You climbed because of your determination. Now you know that with determination, you can climb any rock. You can reach any summit. You can achieve any goal! You only need to know  <em>what</em> you want and put all your efforts in that direction. This is just the Bhongir rock. Do you know that the Everest is the highest peak in the world! You must aim for the Everest. That is why I named this training program, ‘Project Everest’. Set difficult and challenging goals for yourselves. Always think big and aim big.’</p>
		<p>Praveen Kumar distributed certificates. Poorna and Roja shared  the Best Performer award in the Girls category. Nagaraju won the Best Performer award in the Boys category. Poorna walked brisk, with chin up and head held high, just like Praveen Kumar. Praveen Kumar gave her the Best Performer Award certificate and a cash prize of   R 5,000, and said, ‘Good job!’ She was chosen among the one hundred and ten children who came to Bhongir from all over the State.</p>
		<p>Poorna was delighted. Deep in her heart, Poorna was taken in by his words. </p>
		<p>After the event, snacks were served. Praveen Kumar, Sekhar Babu and a few other teaching staff were immersed in conversation. Praveen was listening attentively.</p>
		<p>‘Bharathi,’ Sekhar Babu called, ‘Come here.’ </p>
		<p>Bharathi ran up and stood next to Parmesh. Praveen Kumar patted her shoulder, and said, ‘Good performance.’ </p>
		<p>Sekhar Babu then called out to Nagaraju. He sprung up from the group of children sitting under the tree. </p>
		<p>It was Poorna’s turn to meet the Secretary. As she walked up, she wondered what she would say to him.</p>
		<p>‘So, Poorna,’ he said, extending his hand toward her, ‘You stood first.’</p>
		<p>‘Yes, Sir,’ Poorna’s smile gleamed over her dark face. She held out her tiny hand. He held her hand warmly and said, ‘It’s lovely meeting champions like you Poorna. Keep it up!’ </p>
		<p>Poorna pranced back to her friends.</p>
		<p><em>He called me a champion!</em> </p>
		<p>Praveen watched Poorna as she ran toward the Bhongir rock to join her friends chatting under the sprawling shade of a large tree. Her small frame stood in stark contrast to the rock. </p>
		<p><em>The immense rock. The petite girl.</em></p>
		<p><em>The petite girl and her immense determination.</em></p>
		<p>The irony struck him. </p>
		<p><em>The petite girl conquered the immense rock. Sheer will! Sheer determination!</em></p>
		<p>He was in awe of the potential of the human mind. </p>
		<p>‘Wow,’ he thought! ‘Just wow...’</p>
		<p>He turned toward Sekhar Babu. ‘Tell me more; how did the children perform?’</p>
		<p>‘Sir,<em>bacche to bohot acche hain,</em> (The children performed very well) Sir! Both boys and girls are very energetic, motivated and focused, Sir.’</p>
		<p>‘That’s good to know. I am glad I have signed this program with you...the two-men army has done a good job!’</p>
		<p>‘Sir, to be honest, for some of these children, climbing this rock was a cakewalk. A few of them have great potential. They are cut out for trekking and expeditions. The children, their PETs …nobody knows this.’ </p>
		<p>‘I see. This is interesting.’</p>
		<p>‘Well, do you think these children should be given the next level of training?’</p>
		<p>‘Well...yes...but not all of them. I can see the spark in some of the children...they can reach great heights, literally...’</p>
		<p>‘Hmm.’</p>
		<p>‘But definitely, a few can become great mountaineers.’</p>
		<p>‘So, what is the next level of training?’</p>
		<p>Sekhar Babu gave it a serious thought and said, ‘HMI, Sir.’</p>
		<p>‘Himalayan Mountaineering Institute? Are you serious? Aren’t there any other training centres closer to school?’</p>
		<p>‘No, Sir. No other mountaineering school in South India. And the children are good enough to be sent to HMI.’</p>
		<p>HMI is a world-class institute established by Jawaharlal Nehru recognizing mountaineering as an organized sport after Tenzing Norgay summited Mount Everest in 1953. </p>
		<p><em>HMI, for these children..!!How absurd.</em></p>
		<p>Sekhar Babu for a moment, regretted the thought. </p>
		<p><em>HMI is maintained by the Ministry of Defence. These are high school children! But </em>unless  <em>one tries, one never knows. There’s nothing to lose. It’s a proposal, after all.</em></p>
		<p>Praveen Kumar stood up. ‘Okay, time for me to leave.’ His gunman called for the vehicle on his wireless. The vehicle revved into the campus. The chauffeur opened the door and waited. Praveen Kumar waved goodbye to the children sitting under the canopy of trees. Upon seeing him, they stood up at once. </p>
		<p><em>Mountaineers!</em></p>
		<p>He said to himself under his breath and got into the vehicle. The door closed with a soft thud.</p>
		<p>Fifteen minutes later, Sekhar Babu received a call from Praveen Kumar. </p>
		<p>Praveen Kumar came straight to the point.</p>
		<p>‘Sekhar Babu, I think we can go ahead with the HMI proposal. Before that, I want you to convince my boss, the Principal Secretary of Social Welfare Residential Schools.’</p>
		<p>‘Your boss? I convince him?’ Sekhar Babu suspended all formalities for a moment and said, ‘Sir, you must be joking. How can I?’</p>
		<p>‘You  <em>can</em> convince him. I will arrange for a meeting. Meanwhile, short-list the top twenty performers who can be sent to HMI.’ Praveen Kumar hung up.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>Two weeks later, Poorna packed her bags for a training camp to be held at Social Welfare Residential School in Gowlidoddi, located in the suburbs of Hyderabad. This was the pre-level training for students shortlisted for advanced training at The Himalayan Mountaineering Institute (HMI), Darjeeling. </p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
