<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-004">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Warming Up to the Frozen Mountains</h1>
		<p><strong>26 October 2013<br />6.00 pm<br />Secunderabad Railway Station</strong></p>
		<p><span class="big-letter">E</span>xcitement was palpable among the nineteen children travelling to Himalayan Mountaineering Institute (HMI). One more boy, Praveen Kumar, would join them at Vishakapatnam. The children looked smart in their sports uniform, with ‘Social Welfare Residential School’ printed on the back of their t-shirts. Their excitement peaked when the train whistled and began to move slowly. For most of them, this was their first ever train journey. Their nervous excitement was uncontainable. A few, for whom this was not the first, bossed over the novices. Some suppressed their excitement to look cool. However, for everyone, this was the first journey across the State borders. The  train chugged along, drowning the buzz of chatter.</p>
		<p>The children were travelling by sleeper class to New Jalpaiguri Railway Station junction from where they would be driven to HMI in Darjeeling. They were scheduled to reach the station in thirty-six hours, i.e., next evening.</p>
		<p>Parmesh scanned the entire compartment to ensure everything was in order. He was quite satisfied: students were comfortable; the luggage was tucked below the berths; there was enough food for breakfast and lunch; above all, the children were in good spirit.</p>
		<p>He took attendance, and this was the third time; the first at Secunderabad railway station platform; and, second, before the train started: Poorna, Roja, Bharathi, Deevena, Abhilasha, Saika Krishnaveni, Ramalakshmi, Sarita, Ravali, Rupa, Anand, Gangadhar, Satya Rao, Madhukar, Anjani Prasad, Mohan Prasad, Nagaraju, Srikumar, Shyam Prasad. Once Praveen Kumar joined them at Vishakhapatnam, they would be ten girls and ten boys. </p>
		<p><em>Aghh...twenty adolescents and three of us! </em></p>
		<p>The thought rooted itself in Parmesh’s mind. He looked nervously at Surekha, the PET teacher. She returned a reassuring smile. She was well-acquainted with the children, as she had worked with them for a whole month. The fact that she taught at one of the Social Welfare Residential Schools was an added advantage. Anil, Paramesh’s assistant, accompanied them. </p>
		<p>The engine was replaced at the Khajipet station. After breakfast, the children played  <em>antyakshari</em>. The train resumed after a twenty-minute halt. A quarter of an hour passed. Parmesh began to feel anxious. It took a couple of minutes for him to figure out what was bothering him. Then it hit him. The train that was supposed to make a right turn at Khajipet had taken a left turn. He enquired with his fellow passengers. They had no clue. He rushed to the TTE. </p>
		<p>‘We had to change the route. The cyclone has hit Odisha. Two bridges have collapsed at Srikakulam.  <strong>So we have taken a detour</strong>.’</p>
		<p><em>Oh! Praveen Kumar. How will he reach the camp? We are not even going via Vishakapatnam!</em></p>
		<p>He called Sekhar Babu to brief him of this unexpected development. Sekhar Babu assured that he would help Praveen reach Darjeeling. By evening, after much anxiety, Parmesh learnt that the train was redirected via Khajipet-Karimnagar-Nagpur-Madhya Pradesh-New Jalpaiguri instead of the regular Khajipet-Vijaywada-Vishakhapatnam-Bhuvaneswar-Kolkata-New Jalpaiguri route. Since the train was unscheduled, it was accommodated between two other trains at every station. Paramesh could not reach the platform to buy food for the children. He managed to pick up whatever little he could within the limited time to keep hunger at bay. </p>
		<p>The train reached New Jalpaiguri after fifty-six hours! Although it was evening, the sun was still blazing, and the heat hit them in the face. Sekhar Babu had arranged taxis for the journey to Darjeeling. Parmesh instructed the students to keep their jackets handy before boarding the taxi. The children were puzzled. The temperature was higher than in Hyderabad for that hour. They reached Darjeeling after a three and a half hour drive, at 7.30 pm.</p>
		<p>The children were rushed into their rooms. Despite wearing jackets, their teeth chattered, and hands shivered. They were in a sub-zero temperature zone for the first time in their lives. They quickly freshened up and assembled for dinner, eager to snuggle back into the warm comforters. </p>
		<p>Parmesh read out the schedule for the next day at the dining table. Since HMI does not entertain foster care, Parmesh, Anil and Surekha had also enrolled themselves into the program so they could watch over the children. </p>
		<p><strong>28 October 2013<br />5.45 am<br />HMI Ground</strong></p>
		<p>The children gathered at the practice ground for their workout. The morning fog was still dense. The temperature was as low as 6˚c. Despite the long journey and sudden shift in weather conditions, the children had managed to beat fatigue to assemble at the practice ground on time. </p>
		<p>Parmesh beamed with pride. </p>
		<p>He had conducted training for thousands of children.</p>
		<p><em>These children are different. They have fire in their belly. These are not the spoilt brats coming out of incubation chambers. Education is a luxury for these children, </em>he thought.</p>
		<p>The junior instructor arrived first and took attendance. The senior instructor arrived at 6 am. </p>
		<p>‘These children...??!!’ He said with surprise and disbelief.</p>
		<p>He went through the chart and looked at them again. Turning toward Parmesh, he said, ‘These children are too young. How can we train them? We have never trained such young ones.’</p>
		<p>‘But, this is a special course. We have written approval. Praveen Kumar Sir has already taken the necessary permission. He has also spoken to Captain Samuel.’ </p>
		<p>Captain Samuel Larlintunga is the officiating principal of HMI.</p>
		<p>‘Maybe. But the minimum qualifying age for this program, after all concessions, is seventeen. How can we accept children below fifteen years?’ </p>
		<p><em>‘Yeh toh chote bacche hain bhai</em>! (These are small children!) Below fifteen years, we are stretching this too far!’</p>
		<p>Parmesh checked the chart. He knew that all the children were under seventeen. But he did not expect some of them to be as young as thirteen! ‘Sir, but we  <em>have </em>permission ...’</p>
		<p>The senior instructor thought for a few seconds.</p>
		<p>‘<em>Accha. Pehle inko running ke liye le jaavo</em>…’ (Ok, first take them out for a run.)</p>
		<p>The junior instructor blew the whistle. The students started the four-kilometer run around the hill adjacent to HMI. No sooner had they started, one of them came back limping, clutching his stomach, face contorted in pain. </p>
		<p>‘Sir,’ he said, gasping for breath. ‘My stomach is aching.’ </p>
		<p>The senior instructor gave Parmesh a sharp look.</p>
		<p>Parmesh knew the tedious train journey and sudden change in climate had not gone well with the children. A three-day long train journey had landed them from one of the hottest regions to one of the coldest areas of India. The children needed some time to acclimatize themselves to the new environment. </p>
		<p>The junior instructor mustered all his energy and shouted, ‘Run!!’</p>
		<p>But his voice went flat. He could not bring himself to use the loud, commanding tone he always used during training sessions. But these are not trainees. Too young to be called ‘Trainees of HMI’.</p>
		<p>‘These children are too young for this course,’ said the senior instructor over breakfast. ‘They are still children.<em>Naadaan hain. Fit ho to sahi. Par woh kaafee nahin hain. </em>(They are innocent. Yes, they are fit, but that is not quiet enough.) Their lungs, calf muscles, bone and body length, are still developing.’</p>
		<p>After a few minutes of silence, he finally said, ‘ <em>Teek hain. </em>(Alright). Our Course Director will be back in three days. In the meantime, let’s complete the theory lessons, equipment handling and rock climbing exercises.<em>Phir dekhenge.</em>(we shall see what we can do.)’</p>
		<p>Parmesh was relieved.</p>
		<p>By evening, Praveen Kumar arrived at the institute along with his father. The children gathered around him as he shared with great enthusiasm his adventurous travel to HMI.</p>
		<p>Praveen’s father was in awe of the beauty of Darjeeling. He had never seen a hill station with such extreme temperatures. </p>
		<p>Gaping at the Nepali instructors, he asked Parmesh, ‘Sir, are we in India?’ </p>
		<p>‘Yes. Yes. We are!’</p>
		<p><strong>29 October, 2013</strong></p>
		<p>Parmesh was called to the Course Director’s chamber. He was hoping and praying that the children will be allowed to complete the course. His anxiety turned to surprise when he entered the Director’s chamber. </p>
		<p>‘<em>Arey</em>! Jyothi Sir!!’</p>
		<p>Roshan Ghatraj is known as ‘Jyothi’ among colleagues and friends. </p>
		<p>‘Don’t you recognize me? I am Parmesh Singh, your student from the 2001 batch.’</p>
		<p>Jyothi was the course instructor when Parmesh completed his Advanced Mountaineering Course in HMI in 2001.</p>
		<p>After a few seconds, he said, ‘ <em>Haan, yaad aaya Parmesh. Kaise ho</em>?’ (Yes. I remember Parmesh. How are you?)</p>
		<p>‘<em>Teek hoon Sir! Abhi toh meraa waat lagee hain</em>!’ (I am good, Sir. But right now, I am in a soup.)</p>
		<p>‘<em>Haan, haan sunaa hain. Baito.</em>’ (Yes, I heard about that. Please sit.)</p>
		<p>In a bid to convince Jyothi, Parmesh explained that the children had undergone rock climbing lessons and that he had assessed them as quick learners, quite tough for their age. </p>
		<p>‘<em>Teek hain, </em>Sir. Let’s do one thing. Let’s give them a test. Let the children do the Tiger Hill exercise. They will leave by 7.00 am and return by 2.00  pm,’ Parmesh suggested.</p>
		<p>‘Generally it is 1 pm,’ Jyothi corrected him, with a smile.</p>
		<p>‘Yes, Sir! Generally, it is 1 pm. But I need one more hour, considering their age’.</p>
		<p>‘Sure. Take one and a half hours. But be careful. These are children. Not that you don’t know. We are answerable to their parents,’ Jyothi said looking straight into Parmesh’s eyes, with a serious demeanor.</p>
		<p>Parmesh knew Jyothi well. He is well-meaning. He is always concerned about the well-being of his students, not just because he is answerable.</p>
		<p>As he walked out, Parmesh decided not to tell the children that this would be an elimination test of sorts. The fitness and the feasibility of training these children now rested entirely on his judgment. He felt all the more responsible for the children now. </p>
		<p><strong>30 October, 2013<br />10.30 am<br />Course Director’s Office, HMI</strong></p>
		<p>The next morning, Poorna and her friends began jogging toward Tiger Hill. They were at ease in the new locale after three days of routine. Tiger Hill is 11  km from HMI and 2,590 meters above sea level. The sunrise point on the hill is a tourist attraction. The entire Kanchenjunga range is visible from atop Tiger Hill. Under a clear sky, even the peak of Mount Everest, 172 km away is visible. The children reached the hilltop in a few hours.</p>
		<p>The atmosphere at Tiger Hill is almost similar to the atmosphere on the Himalayan range. The oxygen content is low, and staying at the top is usually not recommended beyond 15 minutes for first-time climbers. Parmesh was keen that the children get a glimpse of the Kanchenjunga range. But a thick layer of fog had reduced visibility to nil. With no luck, the officer accompanying the students suggested that it was time to leave. However, Parmesh requested for another fifteen minutes hoping the fog would clear, but in vain. </p>
		<p>Parmesh looked at his watch as soon as they entered HMI. He called Jyothi, who was in a meeting. Jyothi looked at the large wall clock in his room. It showed 1 pm. </p>
		<p>Parmesh said jocularly, ‘Shall we go again?!’</p>
		<p>‘Yes, Sir!’ roared the children.</p>
		<p>‘But Sir...,’ Madhukar mumbled. ‘Lunch  <em>karke jaayenge</em> Sir,  <em>bahut bhook lag rahi hain</em>.’ (Let’s go after lunch. We are quite famished.)</p>
		<p>The group burst out laughing.</p>
		<p>Jyothi agreed to send the children to HMI Base Camp for the ‘height gaining process’, an essential aspect in mountaineering that helps acclimatization at higher altitudes. </p>
		<p><strong>1 November 2013<br />Darjeeling to Yaksum</strong></p>
		<p>A seven-hour drive, with a two-hour lunch break at Jorethang took the children to Yaksum, a fairly big village in west Sikkim, located at an altitude of 1,780 meters (5,840 feet above sea-level). From Yaksum, they would trek back to HMI Base Camp located in Chaurikhang, in west Sikkim, over three days via the Bakhim-Dzongrila route. The Yuksom-Dzongri trek is a popular high-altitude trek in west Sikkim. The trek path passes through dense forests, alpine lakes and culminates at the Kangchenjanga. The temperature in early November is quite pleasant, with large patches of picturesque green tracts of land.</p>
		<p><strong>2 November 2013<br />Yaksum to Bakhim</strong></p>
		<p>Bakhim is at an altitude of 3,100 metres (9,000 feet approximately) and is also called Camp 1. The trek from Yaksum to Bakhim is twelve kilometers. The children were scheduled to start at 7 o’ clock. A fit adult, who is a seasoned trekker, usually covers this distance in five to six hours. </p>
		<p>‘<em>Teek hain, yeh to bacchen hai. Chaar baje tak pohoche to bi teek hain. </em>(These are children. It’s good enough even if they reach by 4 o’ colock .) We’ll have late lunch. Let’s carry some chocolates and biscuits to munch along the way,’ the HMI staff suggested. </p>
		<p>Parmesh was alert for symptoms of mountain sickness. Although the trek could be covered in six hours, Parmesh remembered that he had taken more than six hours to reach Bakhim the first time.</p>
		<p>Each of them carried a rucksack containing a sleeping bag, a few clothes, climbing equipment and food to eat on their way. Parmesh and the HMI staff made sure that the students got a break once every hour and a half. They stopped by a stream or waterfall and munched on chocolates and biscuits.</p>
		<p>After a three-hour trek, Bharathi leaned against a near-by tree, threw her rucksack on the ground and slumped on to the ground.</p>
		<p>‘I cannot do it anymore, Sir. <em>Chala alisipoyaanu.</em> (I am exhausted.) Can I go back?’ Parmesh gauged that this was not a symptom of acute mountain sickness. </p>
		<p>He called out to the rest of the children, ‘Bharathi is not feeling well. Can a few of you please carry her luggage?’</p>
		<p>No one came forward. Carrying their own rucksacks was tiring enough.</p>
		<p>‘Come on. Let’s distribute her luggage.’ </p>
		<p>Everybody looked away.</p>
		<p>‘I can help, Sir,’ Anand offered. </p>
		<p>A few other students made hesitant offers. </p>
		<p>‘Very good!’</p>
		<p>Parmesh took out the sleeping bag and gave it to Anand. He distributed her equipment into two other rucksacks. He fastened the rucksack again and lifted it to check the weight. </p>
		<p>‘Should not be more than two kilos. Now take it,’ he said and helped Bharathi wear on her rucksack again. </p>
		<p>The team reached Bakhim in six and a half hours. Parmesh loved the surprise written large on the faces of the HMI staff who welcomed them.</p>
		<p>Bharathi was attended to by a doctor. It was her mind playing games, probably because of home sickness. In a day, she was back on her feet.</p>
		<p>The HMI personnel advised Parmesh to halt at Bakhim for two nights, considering that the altitude difference between Yaksum and Bakhim was around 5,000 feet. The next halt, Dzongri was at 13,200 feet. Treading slowly is the key to survival and acclimatization in these extreme temperatures.</p>
		<p>After lunch, the group was taken for a short walk to a small hillock just to assess their fitness level. The next day too, exercise was limited to a short walk. </p>
		<p><strong>2 November 2013</strong></p>
		<p>It was Diwali. The HMI personnel gave each child two candles and asked them to cut each to make three smaller candles. A  <em>halwai </em>was called to prepare sweets. They lit the candles around the stay-house. The house glowed elegantly amongst the snowy mountains of Himalayas. </p>
		<p><strong>4 November 2013<br />Bakhim to Dzongri</strong></p>
		<p>The team headed to Dzongri, also called Camp 2, at an altitude of 13,200 feet. Dzongri is picture perfect with a beautiful blend of greenery and snow. This exotic trek path is internationally famous. Although seasoned trekkers were known to take eight hours to cover the distance, the children covered it in seven and a half hours.</p>
		<p>The contingent returned from Dzongri to HMI.</p>
		<p>‘<em>Manntalu, manntalu</em>...,’ (It’s burning... burning...) Parmesh heard someone scream from the dining area that evening.</p>
		<p>Parmesh rushed to find Mohan jumping up and down while the other children were trying to figure out what was happening. Anand was recording this scene on Parmesh’s mobile with a mischevious smile! Mohan had washed his hands in cold water, although hot water was available. Little did he know that tap water would be chill and chilled water would burn the skin, just like hot water. It took about fifteen minutes for the burning sensation to subside. Parmesh took this opportunity to warn the children against ‘metal bite’. A piece of metal, for instance, a spoon, when left outside the whole night, would stick to the skin and peel the skin off if pulled. He strongly recommended that the students wear gloves or mittens before holding or clasping any object. </p>
		<p>Although Mohan recovered in fifteen minutes, his friends teased him about this incident all through the expedition.</p>
		<p><strong>5 November 2013<br />Dzongri to HMI</strong></p>
		<p>The team started its journey at 7.00 am to the HMI Base Camp, which is at an altitude of 14,600 feet. They reached HMI Base Camp by 3.30 that noon. The last four hours they trekked on a snow track. There were no signs of greenery around, no grass, no bushes and no trees. All they could see was an endless white carpet of snow. A sudden silence descended on the bubbly and chirpy children. The infinite whiteness of the snow mountains reflected in their eyes. Huge tents of mountains rose up to the skies. The sky, hanging above with its corners tucked into the mountains with the valleys blissfully snuggled in between was indeed breathtaking. The innocent souls were instantly, irrevocably hypnotized by the mystic Himalayan range.</p>
		<p>Parmesh observed every member of his team, for it was at this altitude and at this temperature that trekkers often suffered from Acute Mountain Sickness (AMS). Usually about a fourth of any trekking contingent suffers from symptoms of AMS including headache, nausea, restlessness, breathing problems, cramps, etc. The most dangerous symptom is hypothermia, a drop in body temperature due to exposure to the strong chilly winds that sweep across the mountains. Appropriate clothing is very essential to prevent hypothermia. </p>
		<p>Pulmonary edema or accumulation of water in the lungs is another critical condition. The atmosphere at such high altitudes contains tiny particles of snow, which enter the lungs during breathing. The snow particles condense due to body temperature, and the lungs fill up with water, narrowing the lung space for oxygen. Typically, in the tropics, the air is composed of 70% oxygen and 30% other gases. In high altitudes such as the Himalayas, the atmosphere comprises only 50% oxygen, and the rest is other gases. The lungs begin to take in more air for want of more oxygen. This activity cannot be stopped as it is an involuntary process initiated by the body for survival. This process continues during sleep too. If the body fails to adjust, then oxygen will have to be administered externally. To avoid these severe conditions, acclimatization is very essential. Experienced mountaineers can also become victims of this condition. A mountaineer will have to allow his body to acclimatize each time he undertakes an expedition. Acclimatization allows the body enough time to naturally produce more Red Blood Cells to absorb oxygen that is required for survival at such heights. </p>
		<p>Parmesh was only thankful that none of his children had to face any of these symptoms. The children played on the premises of HMI Base Camp. Every four or five hours, the HMI Base Camp staff was instructed over walkie-talkie by HMI staff to assess the children. A sick child would have to be sent back to HMI. But none of them had to go. The children of Social Welfare Residential Schools displayed acute survival instincts.</p>
		<p><em>The team is fit and fine</em>, HMI staff regularly updated their Secretary, Praveen Kumar.</p>
		<p><strong>10 November 2013<br />Mount Renock</strong></p>
		<p>The children successfully summited Mount Renock, 16,500 feet above sea level in the Kanchenjunga range of mountains. This was their first real mountaineering expedition and first victory in mountaineering. Three students who couldn’t cope with the hectic schedules were dropped at the Base Camp. </p>
		<p>The children were mesmerized by the view from atop Renock. They were awestruck by the sublime beauty surrounding them – the expansive stretch of pure whiteness, broken by a hint of green and brown here and there amidst the howl of the strong, chill winds. They hoisted the Indian flag and shouted slogans of Social Welfare Residential Schools. </p>
		<p><strong>13 November 2013<br /> Darjeeling</strong></p>
		<p>The trekking contingent arrived in Darjeeling, having experienced a euphoria that they hadn’t known ever before. They had witnessed and embraced nature in all its enormity and glory. Jyothi Sir was thrilled to receive the children. He was relieved that all of them were in good form.</p>
		<p>Along with the euphoric expression, he also noticed a serenity, and calmness that comes out of a sublime experience. This euphoria is not just a sensual high but also that which emanates from a heightened spiritual experience. He was quite familiar with this expression on the faces of hundreds of people who came to HMI. But this was the first time he saw it on the faces of young, innocent children, who are nearer to the spiritual realm of life. Their innocence mingled with sublimity reminded him of the serenity of monks in a monastery. </p>
		<p>He remembered his initial concern. </p>
		<p><em>How can we train these small children? How can we take them to the mountains? </em></p>
		<p>Captain Samuel had advised Jyothi Sir, ‘Just run the course. Let’s see how they perform.’ </p>
		<p>Jyothi was almost sure that the children would not make it till the finishing line. The children had proved him wrong. He carefully examined the training chart. The children had excelled in glacier walk, height gaining, Jumaring and rock climbing. Their performance motivated the course instructors to teach them more and more. </p>
		<p>During the expedition, Jyothi instructed his staff to check on the children all through the night. This was the first time that the children slept in sleeping bags. However, the bags were too big. </p>
		<p>Language was a barrier. The HMI staff was conversant in English and Hindi. Most children couldn’t speak or understand Hindi. A smattering of English and gestures were the only mode of communication. Nevertheless, they bonded well.</p>
		<p><strong>16 November 2013</strong></p>
		<p>HMI had organized a graduation ceremony for the Welfare School contingent and had invited the Secretary, Mr. Praveen Kumar and Sekhar Babu to the event. The children were excited that Mr. Praveen Kumar was coming all the way to be part of the event. </p>
		<p>As soon as he arrived at HMI, he met Parmesh and said, ‘Where are the children. I want to meet them right away!’ </p>
		<p>‘<em>Han han Sir, hum bhi taras rahe hain,</em>’ (Yes Sir, even we are eagerly waiting) said Sekhar Babu.</p>
		<p>The children rushed to the lobby to meet Praveen Kumar. The large lobby echoed with the children greeting Praveen Kumar in one go. Praveen happily welcomed the energy. There  were twenty handshakes competing with each other – all transmitting love and gratitude.</p>
		<p>He saw in them, the future, the future of  <em>Swaeroes,</em> his icons of the future. </p>
		<p>As he looked, his gaze turned quizzical. ‘Guys, where is your winter wear?’ </p>
		<p>The children looked at themselves and wondered. Only Sekhar Babu and Praveen were wearing sweaters. After the early morning drill, the children had had their bath and rushed to meet Praveen Kumar, forgetting their winter wear. Praveen Kumar looked at his smart watch. The barometer showed 4˚c! </p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
