<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-005">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Defying Odds, Vision for Future</h1>
		<p><strong>17 November 2013</strong></p>
		<p>‘Y<em>ehjo material hain</em>….’ (These children...) Jyothi paused amidst deep thought and said, ‘Praveen Kumar <em>ji, yeh aisi waisi material nahin hain. Yeh aath hazaar meter par tak chalne ki laayak hain…</em>’ (They are not run-of-the-mill kind. They are good for 8,000 meters too.)</p>
		<p>Praveen stopped short hearing these words. He wasn’t sure he had heard Jyothi right. He turned to look at the expression on Jyothi’s face. Jyothi was looking into the distance; his eyes fixed on nothing in particular. He certainly wasn’t joking.</p>
		<p>Praveen understood exactly what Jyothi had just implied. The children were capable of reaching the <strong>DEATH ZONES</strong>! Let alone DEATH ZONES, Praveen Kumar hadn’t even imagined he would send the children to HMI. Praveen Kumar would have dismissed these words, had they come from anyone other than Jyothi. But now he was gripped by them. </p>
		<p>Jyothi seemed convinced. According to Jyothi, they are ready for the next big step.</p>
		<p>Is <em>he</em> convinced? Does <em>he</em>think so? </p>
		<p>He could not elicit answers from himself just yet. He parked the questions and decided to think over them another time. </p>
		<p>After presenting the certificates, Jyothi took him around the HMI campus. He was high praises for Praveen’s initiative to give the children an experience of the HMI camp. He also lauded the commitment of the trainers and the supporting staff.</p>
		<p>Praveen thanked him and said, ‘Sir, all things said and done, the children are the real heroes. Their energy and tenacity are incomparable. They are self-motivated.’</p>
		<p>Praveen bid goodbye to the children.</p>
		<p>Sekhar Babu and Parmesh headed to the cafeteria. </p>
		<p>‘<em>Parso, bacchon ko phir se Tiger Hill pe leke jaana hain Sir</em>! (The day after, we plan to take the children to Tiger Hill.) I want them to see the Kanchenjunga range from there,’ Parmesh said. </p>
		<p>‘A wall climbing workshop has also been planned, Sir,’ Sekhar Babu added.</p>
		<p>‘Fantastic. We will meet once you are back,’ said Praveen.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>The car cruised through the lush green tea gardens swirling down the <em>ghats</em> to reach Bagdogra airport from Darjeeling. Praveen Kumar sat in the front seat. The crisp fresh air was soothing.</p>
		<p>Nothing is more precious for Praveen, than time. He has a clear vision for his life. He knows exactly what he wants to do with his life and what he wants to achieve during this lifetime. He is on a mission. And nothing and nobody can stop him. His vision and mission are not self-centered. All his efforts are directed outward, toward humanity. He believes that he is a mere instrument to promote equality and balance in the life of those communities that are marginalized and deprived of the privileges and benefits of the democratic system; no it’s not even the privileges and benefits; it is the basic human rights as guaranteed by the Indian Constitution. </p>
		<p>He was preoccupied with something else now. His conversation with Jyothi was replaying itself again and again in his mind. He shuffled in his seat. De, Praveen Kumar’s driver, tried to divert his attention to the men and women picking tea leaves, but his mind wouldn’t budge. </p>
		<p><em>The children can reach the DEATH ZONES at 8,000 meters above sea level!</em></p>
		<p>There are only fourteen DEATH ZONES in the entire world. It isn’t easy to survive in these zones, and hence the name. At altitudes of around 8,000 meters, the air pressure drops to 30% compared to that at sea level. Hence the oxygen intake reduces to 30%. Surviving sub-zero temperatures is another gigantic challenge. Above 8,000 meters, the temperature drops to as low as -50˚C. Under such conditions, keeping oneself emotionally stable is critical. Physical endurance would have been achieved through training and workouts. But psychological endurance has to be achieved on the go. Praveen knows for a fact that the ratio of mountaineers who perish in the DEATH ZONES is more than in any other zone.</p>
		<p><em>Can the students be expected to succeed while exposed to such high risk zones? </em>He wondered.</p>
		<p><em>Saath aath hazaar ke laayak!!</em></p>
		<p>These words sent a chill up his spine. Jyothi thinks the children can reach the DEATH ZONE!! These innocent, carefree children?? Jyothi would never be casual; and, certainly not when he is talking about children. <em>This</em> is his assessment of the Social Welfare School children. </p>
		<p><em>My children. My Swaeroes! </em></p>
		<p>His heart swelled with pride.</p>
		<p><em>My Swaeroes are top class mountaineers! Yes. They are! worthy of scaling 7,000 - 8,000 meters.</em></p>
		<p>His Swaeroes! Mountaineers! </p>
		<p><em>No ordinary teenager will bathe in cold water in this climate! No teenager will step out of his room without winter wear! What singular mental strength do these children possess to be able to summit a mountain at an altitude of 16,500 feet from sea level? What energy, what constitution do they inherit to achieve this feat, with such minimal training?</em></p>
		<p><em>To be or not to be?</em></p>
		<p>He tapped his fingers rhythmically on his armrest. </p>
		<p><em>To send them or not?</em></p>
		<p><em>But why am I taking this on myself? My intention was to give these children an opportunity. An experience. Is this not enough? </em></p>
		<p>He saw the faces of the beaming children. </p>
		<p><em>Poorna! Happy. Full of energy. Focused. From a small village. She climbed Mount Renock. 16,500 feet!</em></p>
		<p><em>Bharathi! Perseverance incarnate!</em></p>
		<p><em>Roja! She has already devised her own technique of climbing. Not to mention her precision!</em></p>
		<p><em>Don’t they deserve a chance to do more? But why do more? What’s the limit?</em></p>
		<p><em>Why do I need to prove this? And to whom?</em></p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p><em>Why does Praveen Kumar want a transfer?</em></p>
		<p>Praveen Kumar took a deep breath. He certainly knows why.</p>
		<p><em>Two roads diverged in a wood, and I –</em></p>
		<p><em>I took the one less travelled by,</em></p>
		<p><em>And that has made all the difference.</em></p>
		<p>It’s been two years since he requested a transfer to the Social Welfare Department from the Police Department. He had spent 17 years in the Police Department. He started his career as an Assistant Superintendent of Police and grew in rank to become the Joint Commissioner. He was honoured with several medals from the Government of India, including the President’s Gallantry Medal. He was one among the 6,000 officers who have won this medal; the chosen 6,000 among the 20 lakh police officers in India. </p>
		<p>He was part of the ‘Greyhounds’, the police force that specializes in anti-insurgency operations against Naxalites and Maoist terrorists in Andhra Pradesh. The covert operations were always life threatening. Despite his success in the Police Forces, he often felt disgruntled. </p>
		<p><em>What am I really achieving? Fame and Honor?</em></p>
		<p><em>My life revolves around promoting myself and my family…I, me, myself? Is this my sole purpose in life?</em></p>
		<p>He and his family lived a life of comfort and luxury—a sprawling bungalow, chauffeur-driven cars, security personnel, a fleet of servants. He gained authority and power. But material gains didn’t bring him fulfilment or satisfaction. The more he had, the more he felt worthless. He spent harrowing, sleepless nights desperate to cross the chasm between what he <em>is</em> and what he wants to <em>become.</em></p>
		<p>His heart beat for the poor, the needy, those at the fringes, the underprivileged, the battered, the tribal woman who was raped; the pregnant adolescent married off at a tender age; the tenth grader who topped the district but soon fell into bad company and died a few years later of liver cirrhosis. He thought of all those women beaten by their inebriated husbands; of children whose future was stunted by poverty and of those that wanted to study but had to help eke out a living.</p>
		<p>During the Telangana movement for a separate State, he had led the operation to quell the agitating students at Osmania University. During the day, he controlled and suppressed their activities; but during the evenings he would find himself in a tea stall engrossed in intense conversations with the same students to understand the core issues facing the youth. He learned two important things about these students: poverty and hopelessness. The rural youth had fire in their belly, big dreams in their eyes; they had knowledge and ambition. But poverty thwarted them from moving forward and the State machinery failed to give them jobs. And thus, the dissonance with the State and its institutions. He loathed himself for being a part of this same system! </p>
		<p>This awakening was a decisive moment. He took study leave and joined the Harvard University for a Masters Program in Public Administration. </p>
		<p>He met and interacted with a lot of people from different parts of the world. He realized that these were people who had wrenched themselves out of the circle of petty materialistic fulfilment; found their true calling; they were working for a greater purpose; a purpose that contributed to the upliftment of humanity; to reach out to larger populations and that had made a difference to their lives. </p>
		<p><em>Life is not all that hopeless. </em></p>
		<p>He remembered telling himself one night. He regained confidence.</p>
		<p>He had found his purpose. He knew he could start afresh.</p>
		<p>He still spent sleepless nights; but not in torment or guilt. But in chalking out a roadmap to achieve his vision.</p>
		<p>Memories of his childhood hit him very often. His village near Achampet in Telangana frequently rose before his eyes. A few incidents from childhood had been etched in his memory. He remembered overhearing his father, a school teacher, hurtfully telling his mother about being asked to clear his leaf-plate ( <em>istaraaku</em>) in a social gathering only because he was an ‘untouchable’. Praveen was slapped once by his teacher for accidentally touching his new shirt. He was made to sit on the back bench because the front benches were reserved for the upper caste boys. During his growing years, the pain and humility made him vengeful. Fortunately, he had been able to channelize his energies to excel in his education and profession. But he was always plagued by guilt because equality and justice were still a far cry for most of his brethren. </p>
		<p>After his Masters at Harvard, he returned to his homeland with a crystal clear vision. He sought an appointment with the Chief Minister. He requested the Chief Minister to provide him an opportunity to serve in the Social Welfare Department. He explained that he could serve the country better in this department, of which he was a beneficiary too. Yes, he was a student of the Social Welfare hostel during his school days. </p>
		<p>What would a <em>kakhi-</em>clad gun-wielding cop do in the Social Welfare Department, was the question on the minds of both the departments. His request raised eyebrows in the bureaucratic circles. Only three friendly officers supported his decision. Fortunately, the Chief Minister gave his nod and granted the transfer. </p>
		<p>After taking charge, he experienced immense resistance from the Teacher’s Union of Social Welfare Residential Schools. He called them for a meeting and explained that he volunteered for this post because he was committed to the cause of educating deprived children. Gradually he gained their trust. </p>
		<p>Just when he thought he had settled down, he realized that he was not really in touch with the ground realities. Knowing is not the same as experiencing. </p>
		<p>He visited a few schools over two weeks. His first school visit was a shocking experience. The schemes were in place, but poverty and discrimination were also still in place! He dug deep into the system to find the loopholes ailing the system. Discrimination continued to thrive in its ugly primitive form.</p>
		<p>Most of the residential schools were very shabby. Only 8% of the schools had bare minimal infrastructure. The parents of the students were forgotten and disrespected. Teachers absolutely had no idea <em>what</em> to teach or <em>how</em> to teach. During one of the visits, an English teacher fainted because Praveen Kumar asked her to read the lesson out loud! He discovered that she had joined the school with a fake certificate. </p>
		<p>The school kitchen was unhygienic and stank. The food was unpalatable. The children were gloomy, spiritless and weak–malnutrition written all over them. Sanitation and hygiene were extremely poor. The girls’ schools were worse off. The system had tolerated such extreme abuse for so many years! He was appalled. But his conviction to bring about a change only grew stronger. </p>
		<p>That night he spoke to his family for over two hours at the dinner table. He explained how he felt. His wife, Laxmibai, understood. His little children couldn’t understand the intensity of the problem, but they understood their father’s turmoil. His wife accompanied him next day to one of the girls’ schools. He showed the despicable condition of the toilets. Nothing could be worse. No human being deserves to live in filth. His wife observed quietly.</p>
		<p>On their way back, they hardly spoke to each other. The silence consumed their dinner-time as well. And then she said, ‘You are right, Praveen. You are working for an honourable cause. Just focus on them as a priority. They need help.’</p>
		<p>Praveen started his work on a war footing. He went from one residential school to another, driven only by one vision: to give children quality education, holistic development, health and hygiene. Over the next six months, he hardly visited home. He travelled from one district to another, visiting schools, conducting audits, identifying lacunae, understanding problems, quantifying the support required and simultaneously acting upon it. Meanwhile, he introduced new programs. He encouraged the children to study and the teachers to teach. He became a tyrant for lazy teachers. For those teachers and officials who understood his intentions, he was a breath of fresh air. Gradually things started falling into place.</p>
		<p>He organized an alumni meet. He was pained to find that most of them worked as janitors or occupied the lowest ranks, despite their good academic performance. He thus focused on the integrated growth of the children. </p>
		<p>He introduced alternate education practices. He involved NGOs. He introduced chess, film-making and horse-riding. He introduced life-skills training programs such as gender sensitization, environmental awareness, and need for cleanliness and hygiene. He reopened the science symposiums and sports programs that had been scrapped fifteen years ago. </p>
		<p>He was not surprised when he discovered that the tenure of the previous few secretaries was not more than three months. No wonder that the welfare system was ignored and the consequences glaringly visible in these schools, which impacted the lives of hundreds of children, whose parents had admitted them here, trusting the State machinery. He wanted to identify the specific interest and talent of every child and help them excel. He would not compromise; he would not give up until the children got what they deserved. He would ensure that every child evolved into an adult empowered to generate happiness within and around.</p>
		<p>Despite poverty and dismal living standards, he noticed an undying spark in these children. Despite the ill care, the children had amazing survival instincts; despite malnutrition, they possessed raw energy. What a rare gift! – survival instinct and raw energy! The capital force for a successful sporting career, especially in adventure sports. Tapping these latent qualities and channelizing them appropriately is the way forward, he decided. </p>
		<p>He soon identified a sports officer among the experienced Physical Directors of various residential schools. He went through their profiles, shortlisted and interviewed them. He was impressed with Mannan, a committed officer, who believed that games and sports promoted physical and mental health. Mannan’s thoughts aligned with his own vision for the Social Welfare System. He believed that children can perform better in academics, as sport induces discipline and body-mind balance. It releases the unrest and helps the children focus better on academics.</p>
		<p>Praveen met his boss Raymond Peter, Principal Secretary of Social Welfare Department, a seasoned bureaucrat. Known to be a tech savvy officer, he had implemented technological initiatives in the Transport Department making it less corrupt, and people friendly. He continued the transparency drive even in the Social Welfare Department. Praveen proposed an adventure-sports program for the children. The ninth and the eleventh standard children could be chosen since the tenth, and the twelfth would be busy with their board exams. Raymond Peter liked the idea. He referred Sekhar Babu (the first South Indian to climb Mount Everest) who ran a school to train rock climbing enthusiasts.</p>
		<p>Praveen spent three hours talking to Sekhar Babu to understand his worth as a ‘teacher’, especially for children with no background in rock climbing or mountaineering. Praveen knew the difference between being a successful mountaineer and a good trainer. No doubt Sekhar Babu is a world class mountaineer, but how good is he as an adventure sports teacher? Praveen preferred best teachers over best performers for training his children.</p>
		<p>The interview soon turned into a discussion and Praveen asked questions to understand the sport, the potential and the scope better. After three hours of discussion, Praveen was convinced about Sekhar Babu’s passion, interest and abilities. There was a more important reason why Sekhar Babu was ideal for his children. He hailed from a modest background though not from the same social strata as the welfare school children. His father was an RTC bus driver who could barely make both ends meet with his earnings. Though he scaled Mount Everest and owned a rock climbing company called ‘Transcend Adventures’, he was unassuming and down to earth. He cared little about his appearance or physical grooming. (He was dressed casually and wore rubber <em>chappals</em> for the meeting.) Sekhar Babu wasn’t even trying to make a statement about himself through his clothes or appearance. His life revolved around mountaineering; the passion to kindle interest and groom youngsters in mountaineering. Praveen Kumar congratulated himself for investing his belief in Sekhar Babu.</p>
		<p>He never revealed to Sekhar Babu that his boss Raymond Peter had referred him. The moment Sekhar Babu owned the students’ future and recommended them for higher courses, Praveen was glad that he had invested his belief in Sekhar Babu. The duo met Raymond Peter with a proposal in hand. </p>
		<p>Praveen told Sekhar, ‘ <em>Bhai, boss ko manaana tumhaara kaam hain</em>.’ (Convincing my boss is your job.)</p>
		<p>The moment Sekhar Babu stepped in along with Praveen, Raymond stretched out his hand and said, ‘ <em>Kya bhai, kaise ho? Humaare bacchein kaise hain</em>?’ (How are you? How are our children?).</p>
		<p>Praveen enjoyed the animation on Sekhar Babu’s face. </p>
		<p>‘<em>Kya dekh rahe ho. Maine hi bheja tha tumhaare pass</em>.’ (I was the one who sent him to you!)</p>
		<p>It took a few seconds for Sekhar to comprehend the situation. </p>
		<p>‘Sir, <em>aap</em>?’.</p>
		<p>He looked at Praveen, ‘Sir, you should have told me. Peter was my boss as well.’</p>
		<p>‘He knows,’ said Raymond Peter. ‘I told you, right? I referred you to Praveen Kumar. I told him that there is a crazy fellow called Sekhar Babu who left his job as an Assistant General Manager in Andhra Pradesh Tourism Department to teach rock climbing.’ </p>
		<p>Sekhar Babu worked in Andhra Pradesh Tourism (then non-bifurcated) and reported to Raymond Peter who was Managing Director of Andhra Pradesh Tourism Department. </p>
		<p>With the support of Raymond Peter, Sekhar Babu and Mannan, Praveen Kumar achieved the singular feat of successfully sending the children of Welfare Residential Schools to summit Mount Renock. </p>
		<p>While Raymond Peter helped by giving administrative approval, Mannan and Sekhar Babu executed the mission. Mannan convinced the teachers and principals of the various schools about the positive effects of sports in general and mountaineering in particular. He also convinced parents about the importance of sports and assured the safety and well-being of their children. He motivated the Physical Education Directors and Physical Education Trainers to enrol their two best students for the training. Sekhar Babu totally owned his dream of training the students to be the best. What gave Praveen Kumar the confidence in Sekhar Babu was the fact that Sekhar Babu was as crazy as he was. He would do anything to pursue his passion and a cause in which he believed. </p>
		<p>During his journey in the Social Welfare Department, Praveen Kumar examined the term <em>Dalit</em> that referred to the deprived caste of the country. He was aghast to learn that it meant ‘broken/scattered’. Are these people really broken and scattered? If broken, who broke them and what makes them broken? Is it the body, confidence or the soul? Why did they allow themselves to be broken? Praveen wanted to give a name that is empowering, emphasizing self-reliance rather than past victimization. </p>
		<p>Thus, <em>Swaeroes</em> was born. SW stands for Social Welfare and aeros (in Greek) means flying in the sky, indicating the sky being the limit for achievement. He framed a few guiding principles. He spent time with a lot of people for several days and came up with the Ten Commandments of Swaeroes.</p>
		<p>1. I am not inferior to anyone.</p>
		<p>2. I shall be the leader wherever I am.</p>
		<p>3. I shall do what I love, and be different.</p>
		<p>4. I shall always think big and aim high.</p>
		<p>5. I shall be honest, hardworking and punctual.</p>
		<p>6. I shall never blame others for my failures.</p>
		<p>7. I shall never beg and cheat.</p>
		<p>8. I shall repay what I borrow.</p>
		<p>9. I shall never fear the unknown.</p>
		<p>10. I shall never give up.</p>
		<p>Swaeroes and their Ten Commandments were launched on 22nd October 2012 at Ravindrabharathi. The day was significant because it was the birth anniversary of Mr. S.R. Sankaran, the famous IAS Officer, who dedicated his life to the emancipation of the marginalized from the yoke of slavery. He fought against the <em>jogini</em> system (a religious practice in which young girls are ‘married’ to Gods and their life is dedicated to prostitution as an occupation. Usually, girls from the scheduled castes are made ‘joginis’.). Child labor and caste discrimination. He remained single and donated his entire pension to the most marginalized children. </p>
		<p>He sent invites to all the Swaeroe alumni. He created a self-declaration and the Swaeroes oath. Membership to the Swaeroes community was open for all, provided they met a few requirements and participated in an oath-taking ceremony.</p>
		<p><em>Swaeroes! He said to himself. The sky is the limit!</em></p>
		<p>What distinguishes the privileged from the underprivileged? Praveen knows the answer: </p>
		<p><em>OPPORTUNITY.</em></p>
		<p><em>Opportunities can be created. I will create them. I will go to any length to create opportunities and show the world that given opportunities, anybody can do anything. The one other requirement, besides opportunity, is WILL POWER.</em></p>
		<p><em>My Swaeroes have abundant will power. They have just proved it beyond all doubt. </em></p>
		<p><em>I will send them to Mount Everest. </em></p>
		<p><em>Dear Mount Everest! My Swaeroes will soon be visiting you!</em></p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
