<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-006">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">On Testing Grounds</h1>
<p><strong>20 November 2013<br />9.30 am<br />Secunderabad Railway Station</strong></p>
<p><span class="big-letter">T</span>he train chugged to a halt amidst announcements of arrivals and departures. </p>
<p>Passengers poured out of the doors like ants spilling out of their holes. The children were eager to return home after a long, exciting journey to the lap of the Himalayas. They were not the same anymore. They returned with renewed energy, enthusiasm and a sense of new-found self-confidence. While most children of their age are engrossed in grooming themselves or fighting over petty things, here were the Swaeroes, returning after a glimpse of the sublime at a tender age. </p>
<p>Parmesh took attendance while Sekhar Babu helped them with their luggage. They stepped on to the platform carrying their luggage.</p>
<p>The platform suddenly drowned in the jolly rhythms of drums. Anand dropped his luggage and craned his neck to see what was happening. To his amusement, he saw a music band –children in uniform playing different instruments. He grinned and waved animatedly at a familiar face: Praveen Kumar stood with the band. He waved back. Anand started dancing to the beats of the drum. The children waved at Praveen Kumar and joined Anand in the dance. They were overwhelmed by this very warm and special welcome. Poorna, shy as she was, remained at the back; her face animated by a wide grin and twinkling eyes. The children were garlanded and felicitated at the station. Sweets were distributed.</p>
<p>Praveen Kumar turned toward his young achievers and signalled the band to stop playing. </p>
<p>‘I am with a bunch of celebrities!! Your achievement is no mean feat! There’s a surprise waiting for you. You have an important meeting coming up with someone very special. Any guesses?’</p>
<p>The children exchanged looks.</p>
<p>‘The honourable Chief Minister wishes to meet you in person!’</p>
<p>The children were dumb struck. They looked at each other in disbelief.</p>
<p>‘Day after tomorrow, you have an appointment with the Chief Minister at his office. He wishes to talk to you. Isn’t that wonderful?’</p>
<p>‘That’s not all. Get ready for another set of interviews. The channels are planning to make a documentary on your achievements. It will be telecast on V6, Sony, E TV, Sakshi TV,’ Mannan, the Sports Officer added. </p>
<p>As the news began to sink in, the children cheered and clapped.</p>
<p>With a sudden explosion, the drum began to beat again and picked up pace while the children danced with gay abandon. </p>
<p>The next day, the media was abuzz with reports of the success of the Swaeroes.</p>
<p><strong>24 November 2013<br />Chief Minister’s Office, Hyderabad</strong></p>
<p>The children looked fresh and smart in their blazers. They were accompanied by Sekhar Babu, Parmesh and Mannan. Parmesh whispered: back erect, shoulders upright and chin up. </p>
<p>When Praveen Kumar saw them, he knew the difference. They were transformed. They easily made eye-contact and they bore a demeanour that exuded self-assuredness, self-esteem and self-respect. </p>
<p><em>Little Ambedkars</em>, Praveen Kumar said to himself. </p>
<p>‘So guys, are you ready to rock?’</p>
<p>‘Yes, Sir!’</p>
<p>They were ushered into the conference room. The children were wide eyed and quiet. They were mesmerized by the grand interiors of the conference room.</p>
<p>Poorna knew this was a very prestigious and important meeting. Not everybody gets an audience with the Chief Minister!</p>
<p>Parmesh briefed the children on the code of conduct, knowing very well that they needed no briefing or monitoring. They were far too mature for their age, and discipline had become a way of life.</p>
<p>Chief Minister, Kiran Kumar Reddy, entered the conference hall accompanied by Raymond Peter, Principal Secretary and flanked by gunmen. All of them stood up. The Chief Minister gave a warm smile and asked them to sit down. The children were smiling from ear to ear.</p>
<p>Praveen Kumar briefed the Chief Minister about the expedition undertaken by the children. He explained that the children were shortlisted based on their performance during the rock climbing course; performance criteria included physical stamina, emotional endurance, self-discipline and team behaviour. He showed photographs of the children scaling Mount Renock. He explained the environmental challenges they faced and how they cleared each hurdle effortlessly, despite their tender age.</p>
<p>‘Wonderful! Congratulations! I am really proud of you,’ he said.</p>
<p>‘Thank you, Sir’.</p>
<p>‘So, what is your name?’ the Chief Minister pointed to one of the students.</p>
<p>‘Anand, Sir.’</p>
<p>‘Anand, tell me about yourself. Where do you come from, and what do your parents do?’</p>
<p>‘Sir, I am from Kaliveru village. My father’s name is Kondal Rao and mother’s name is Laxmi. My mother is an Anganwadi helper in our village. Father works as a mechanic in a local cycle shop. My brother is in the fifth class. I am studying in first year Inter in Annapureddypalli Social Welfare Residential School in Khammam, Sir.’</p>
<p>He exuded confidence and self-assurance. Praveen Kumar beamed with pride. Interacting with new people had certainly given the children a sense of personal identity. </p>
<p>‘So what sport do you play?’</p>
<p>‘All kinds, Sir. Kabaddi, kho-kho, athletics. I am a champion in my school, Sir!’ he beamed.</p>
<p>‘Champion? Great!’</p>
<p>He addressed Satya Rao now. ‘At what level do <em>you </em>compete?’ </p>
<p>Satya Rao hesitated. </p>
<p>‘That’s okay, tell me,’ the Chief Minister encouraged.</p>
<p>‘Sir, I am a State level athlete.’</p>
<p>‘Great, most of you are into sports.’</p>
<p>‘Sir, in fact, all the children here excel in sports,’ said Raymond Peter. </p>
<p>Praveen Kumar introduced each student, highlighting their specific skills, competence and endurance.</p>
<p>‘I’m glad there are so many girls in this program. So how was the experience?’ He asked Abhilasha.</p>
<p>Abhilasha’s face flushed with the attention focused on her. </p>
<p>‘It was really good, Sir. We climbed 16,500 feet.’</p>
<p>‘Wonderful! So this is the first time you saw snow-capped mountains! How was the view of Kanchenjunga range?’</p>
<p>The children were quiet for a few seconds as they recalled the magnificent views. Their eyes lit up. The majestic ranges and the powerful impact it had had on them gave them goose bumps. And then, everyone started talking at once. </p>
<p>‘Sir, you should see to believe.’ </p>
<p>‘It’s paradise on Earth, Sir.’</p>
<p>‘I felt I was in another land altogether. It is an out-of-the-world experience,’</p>
<p>The Chief Minister smiled. He asked the shy girl with bright shining eyes, ‘What did you feel?’</p>
<p>Poorna’s face was animated, ‘Sir, the mountains are so enormous that I can gaze at them forever. The snow ranges are never ending. It was very calm, and I felt very tiny, Sir.’</p>
<p><em>That’s philosophical! </em>Thought Praveen Kumar.</p>
<p>The conference room filled with excitement and energy.</p>
<p>Parmesh had to hush the children to lower their voices.</p>
<p>Sarita continued, ‘Sir, the view of the Kanchenjunga range from Tiger Hill is mesmerizing. And then, to actually climb one of those distant mountains…That was very thrilling, Sir.’</p>
<p>Chief Minister, Kiran Kumar remarked, ‘That must have been a great feeling.’</p>
<p>The children said in unison, ‘Yes, Sir.’</p>
<p>‘I have never felt this happy and proud of myself, Sir,’ said Nagaraju his voice quivering.</p>
<p>Praveen Kumar whispered to Raymond Peter, ‘Sir, this is the right time to propose the Mount Everest Expedition.’ </p>
<p>‘No. Not now. It’s too early. Let us wait a little longer.’</p>
<p>The meeting that was scheduled for ten minutes stretched to forty-five minutes. </p>
<p>‘What did you gain from this expedition?’</p>
<p>Poorna thought that this was a strange question.</p>
<p><em>So what did I gain? </em></p>
<p><em>How can someone ask, what is the use of climbing?</em></p>
<p><em>Do we wonder similarly about cricket? Or science or dance or any discipline for that matter? </em></p>
<p><em>Then why climbing? What do we gain?</em></p>
<p>Poorna felt unsettled.</p>
<p>‘We gained confidence, Sir,’ Anand replied. ‘Climbing a mountain of 17,000 feet from sea level .…we did it. We are confident that we can accomplish any task with hard work.’</p>
<p>Everybody clapped. </p>
<p>Praveen’s happiness knew no bounds. <em>These guys are remarkable.</em></p>
<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
<p>Soon after the Chief Minister’s meet, the Deputy Chief Minister Damodar Rajanarasimha invited all the children to his residence for dinner. He felicitated the twenty children and appreciated them for their success.</p>
<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
<p>‘What is the best method to assess an individual’s ability to climb Mount Everest?’ Praveen Kumar asked Sekhar Babu over tea.</p>
<p>‘A trekking expedition to the mountains during extreme winter is the best option. That would be a good opportunity to assess physical fitness, mental tenacity and survival instincts.’ </p>
<p>‘Hmm. Give me a list of ten children who you think can go to the next level. You can ask HMI to help us with the selection process?’</p>
<p>‘Okay, Sir... <em>Par </em>Sir <em>, budget</em>?’</p>
<p>‘Don’t worry about that. We have sufficient funds in the Welfare Department budget itself. Identifying the right candidates is the priority now.’</p>
<p>‘And Everest?’</p>
<p>‘We will work that out later. First, let us see how the children will shape up.’</p>
<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
<p>Sekhar Babu and Parmesh drew up a list of ten children based on the review report from HMI. The list included four girls - Poorna, Bharathi, Sarita, Roja and, six boys - Anand, Gangadhar, Satya Rao, Madhukar, Mohan Prasad and Nagaraju.</p>
<p>Sekhar invited the ten children for a discussion. He proposed the Mount Everest expedition plan. In preparation for the expedition, the children would first embark on a two-week expedition to Ladakh. </p>
<p>The children let out a collective gasp of excitement. Poorna was ready to start tomorrow if need be! They shot a volley of questions to Sekhar Babu. He answered each question patiently. He also mentioned that the Ladakh Winter Expedition would help draw up a final list of the best climbers for the Everest expedition. </p>
<p>He then said, in a serious tone, ‘Praveen Sir is trying to give you an opportunity, few children of your age can hope for this. He is risking his own job and reputation. If you want to achieve something great in this lifetime, this is the opportunity. This is the path for a better, brighter future, not just for you, but for future generations. Make the most of it. Give it your best shot.’ </p>
<p>Praveen requested Wing Commander Sridharan to join the expedition as Ladakh is governed by the Ministry of Defence. Defence personnel in the expedition team would help in getting clearances and other support.</p>
<p>The pre-Ladakh Winter Expedition training was to be held at Gowlidoddi.’ The children were housed at the Girls’ College at Gowlidoddi, the Magnet School and the IIT-Medical Academy Junior College. Their academics were also taken care of since the children would attend Gowlidoddi Village Welfare Residential School and Training sessions would be conducted on the grounds of the school.</p>
<p>Physical trainers monitored the diet and physical fitness of the children. Venugopal, the Yoga instructor, conducted ‘Art of Living Course for Children’, which included <em>asanas</em> for flexibility and strength; breathing exercises to enhance lung power and prepare the body for efficient breathing at higher altitudes; and, <em>Suryanamaskara</em> for mind and body balance. </p>
<p>In the meantime, Roja, whose mountaineering techniques were by far the best had a medical problem. She had to leave the training mid-way. The trainers and the children were disappointed. Poorna missed Roja the most. </p>
<p>One day, amidst training sessions, Sekhar Babu informed the children that they would be driving down to Hyderabad to meet someone special. The children learnt that a super achiever was being felicitated at the Ramakrishna Mission Ashram in Gandhinagar locality in Hyderabad. </p>
<p>The children arrived at the Ashram. In the auditorium, on the dais were seated a few people. The hall was brimming with audience. As the program began, the lady who sat on the dais was welcomed and introduced. </p>
<p>The children were stunned by her story. A national-level volley ball player, she was pushed out of a moving train by thieves. She was thrown on to the parallel track. She lay there while another train from the opposite direction ran over her leg. Her left leg had to be amputated to prevent gangrene, and a steel rod had to be inserted in her right leg to hold the shattered bones together. Two years after the accident, she summited the Everest to become the first woman in the world with a prosthetic leg to scale Mount Everest! </p>
<p>The first female amputee to climb the Mount Everest – Ms. Arunima Sinha, they announced. The crowd burst into applause.</p>
<p>‘Oh! <em>Chekkakaalu</em>,’ (colloquial expression for a prosthetic leg) the children whispered among themselves.</p>
<p>Poorna was awestruck!</p>
<p>She observed Arunima intently.</p>
<p>Arunima was dressed in formal pants, shirt and shoes. No disability was apparent. She was calm and composed and had a steady expression. Her face expressed contentment, and her body exuded sheer confidence. Nothing about her sought pity or sympathy. </p>
<p><em>What made Arunima summit the Everest? Is it her own steely resolve? </em>Poorna wondered <em>.</em></p>
<p>The children were introduced to Arunima. Each of them shook hands with her. Poorna wanted to say a few words of praise and gratitude, but she fell silent. </p>
<p>It was time to return to their camp at Gowlidoddi. Walking out of the Aashram, Poorna swore that she would never quit until she accomplished her goal. No matter what!</p>
<p>There was very little time left for the expedition. Sekhar Babu had a lot of work on his hands. Foremost, he would have to book tickets to Leh. The first leg of the journey would be from Secunderabad to Delhi by train, and the last from Delhi to Leh city by air. Praveen Kumar requested the Department of Railways through a committed senior Railway official Mr. Bharat Bhushan to book a separate cabin for the children under the emergency quota. </p>
<p>The children would be flying in an aircraft for the first time. This is indeed a historic event in the annals of Welfare Schools. Praveen was overwhelmed.</p>
<p>The children were delighted to receive their passports, a prerequisite, to visit Leh. So far, the ration card was their only prized possession. The tour to the local police station to collect their passports in their native villages was a matter of great pride. These children were the first from any Social Welfare Residential Schools to hold passports. Although many alumni held passports, they only travelled to the Gulf countries to do menial jobs. </p>
<p>The contingent of nine Swaeroes with their trainers Srilatha, Parmesh and Sekhar Babu reached Delhi by AP Express on the morning of 27th December 2013. Wing Commander Sridharan joined them in Delhi. On the morning of the 29th, they took a GoAir flight to Leh from Delhi. After the first train journey just two months ago, now they were experiencing their first air journey. </p>
<p>Sekhar Babu clicked pictures of the children in the airport and next to the aircraft and shared them with Praveen Kumar through WhatsApp.</p>
<p><em>They have come this far. They will go further to conquer the world and carve a better future for themselves, </em>he thought <em>.</em></p>
<p>Despite their excitement, the children appeared extremely composed. However, their curiosity was irrepressible. They explored every nook and corner of the flight. From the runway to the washroom, everything was new. </p>
<p>For Poorna, the take-off was a breathtaking moment. She felt butterflies in her stomach. Sarita and Poorna held each other’s hands and smiled sheepishly. </p>
<p>Once airborne, the aircraft cruised smoothly. Poorna looked out of the window. It was indeed exhilarating to be high up above in the air like a bird!</p>
<p>Anand’s joy knew no bounds. He remembered watching airplanes as they zipped overhead in the open skies, while he grazed his uncle’s cattle in the meadows. And today, he is travelling in one of them to Ladakh! He was certain that none in his village knew that such a place existed in India. Not that he had heard of Ladakh until a few weeks ago!</p>
<p>Parmesh and Sekhar Babu relaxed in their seats. </p>
<p><strong>29 December 2013<br />Leh city, Ladakh</strong></p>
<p>The team along with Wing Commander Sridharan landed in Leh city, in the Ladakh region of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the perfect location for a winter trekking expedition.</p>
<p>This expedition would help the trainers assess the cold-bearing capacity and the survival instincts of the children. It would give them an insight into the emotional stamina of the children at higher altitudes and cold temperatures, which is extremely important for mountaineering.</p>
<p>Ladakh, which literally means, ‘the land of high passes’ is a region that lies at an altitude of more than 3,000 meters. It is one of the most picturesque mountain regions in the world. The region is spread over the north-eastern part of the State of Jammu-Kashmir. Leh, at an altitude of 3,500 meters, is the largest city in the Ladakh region, inhabited mostly by Shia Muslims and Tibetan Buddhists. The average winter temperature of Leh is about a maximum of 10°C and a minimum of -20°C. It is called a cold dessert, as greenery is scarce with vast and versatile shades of brown lands dappled with patches of snow here and there.</p>
<p>The first three days at Leh were reserved for acclimatization. Although the sky was clear during the day, the average temperature remained at 0°C.</p>
<p>They went around the city of Leh – to the market, the army office, the Leh Lake and other tourist places. They bought camping equipment and some other essentials for the forthcoming treks. For the first time they would be sleeping in tents.</p>
<p>Poorna noticed that there were no straight roads; only roads that coiled around the snow covered hills. </p>
<p>Shekar took the children over what seemed like a thick sheet of glass. The children hesitated to step on it, lest it should break!</p>
<p>‘Sir, what really <em>is</em> this?’</p>
<p>‘Take a guess, Poorna.’</p>
<p>‘You are standing on the frozen Lake of Leh.’</p>
<p>The children then looked more closely to find tiny puddles beneath cracks, which were the only proof that it was indeed a frozen lake! They also discovered that the ice rink upon which a few people were skating at a little distance was also a frozen lake! They were amused to hear that at times, the drain water, the tap water and even the rivers froze. Despite the low temperatures, the local people were clad in regular clothes, apart from a sweater and cap for warmth. The children were amused that an egg, when dropped from a height, couldn’t break, and cutting a potato with a knife was equal to sawing dry wood!</p>
<p>The 31st of December 2013 turned out to be a fun filled experience for the children. They celebrated the Losar festival in Ladakh city. The King made an appearance before the public and participated in the celebrations. The city looked colourful in the festive atmosphere, and the children enjoyed watching fire stunts performed all over the city.</p>
<p>Although Sekhar Babu had planned a trek to Stok Kangri, the highest mountain in the Stok Range of the Himalayas in the Ladakh region, the idea was dropped due to rough weather and heavy snowfall. Instead, they decided to camp at Gyamsa (4,100 meters), 25 km from and 500 meters above Leh. This was their first experience of organized camping. </p>
<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
<p>The first day of 2014 found the children in a valley near Khardung La, where they camped overnight. The temperature after sunset dropped to below -30˚C. Three male <em>sherpas</em> and one female <em>sherpa</em> were hired to assist them. While at Leh, they had shopped for camping equipment. A low lying area was chosen for pitching the tent, so it would be protected from strong winds and landslides. The children learnt to pitch and build their own tents. They drilled the pegs into the ground and fastened the tent ropes around them. A typical tent accommodated three people. </p>
<p>Sekhar Babu insisted that the children clothed themselves in four layers – thermal wear, feather jacket, fleece jacket and a windproof suit. At night, they ended up wearing more layers to remain warm, in addition to the mandatory woollen socks, gloves and caps. They spent the night in sleeping bags, which kept them warm. Sleeping bags are designed to bear temperature of -10, -20, -30˚C and so on. </p>
<p>Every day after 7 am, the children, the <em>sherpas</em> and Sekhar Babu would go trekking and return only by 4 pm. They would have dinner by 6.30 in the evening, as the nights are very long and the days are short in Leh. After dinner, they played or indulged in some entertainment activity in the dining tent and hit the bed by 8 pm. The children would fall asleep instantly, for they would be exhausted from trekking all day.</p>
<p>The trekking routes were designed to take them 500-600 meters above Leh city, which landed them at 4,600 meters above sea level.</p>
<p>Once, while on Kharmulah road, they ran short of water and had to melt ice for potable water. This then became a regular affair. Melting ice gave them more water than melting snow. Wing Commander Sridharan explained the concept of density to the children. About 2 kilos of snow yielded one cup of water whereas the same quantity of ice gave them 3 cups of water. </p>
<p>During the treks, they would hit long tracts of land covered in snow. The children would then change into snow boots from trekking shoes. They also had to remove their thermal wear while hiking, because the heat generated from body movement would remain trapped and cause excessive sweating, which in turn would lead to dehydration and exhaustion. However, as soon as they returned to the camping site, they would change back into thermal wear to prevent hypothermia, a condition in which body heat is lost very quickly, resulting in dangerously low body temperatures. </p>
<p>Communicating with the children was a tough task for Sridharan. Shekar Babu and Parmesh doubled as interpreters. Poorna as always took time to warm up to the Commander. </p>
<p>Parmesh and Sekhar Babu observed the children closely all the time; not to assess conscious performance, but to assess their constitutional strength and survival instincts. </p>
<p>They maintained notes: Who exhibits leadership qualities? Who is quick to find solutions? Who gives up easily? Who helps others? Who is organized and efficient?</p>
<p>Sound sleep is a sign of wellness, especially in the mountains. In higher altitude, the air pressure is 30% lesser. The heart works harder to pump in more oxygen into the blood. Blood pressure and pulse rate increase. This body process continues even in sleep. If the body fails to take in enough oxygen, the brain cannot relax, and sleep is often disturbed. Undisturbed, sound sleep is a sign that the body has adapted to the high altitude and that it is getting sufficient oxygen.</p>
<p>To test the efficacy with which the body was adapting, Parmesh had devised a simple technique. He would randomly call out the names of the children during sleep. </p>
<p>‘Satya Rao.’</p>
<p>‘Yes, Sir!’ He responded from another tent.</p>
<p>«Sarita…»</p>
<p>‘<em>Haan</em>, Sir.’</p>
<p>‘Anand.’</p>
<p>Silence.</p>
<p>‘Anand,’ A little louder this time.</p>
<p>Silence.</p>
<p>‘Poorna.’</p>
<p>Silence.</p>
<p>‘Poorna.’</p>
<p>Only the murmur of deep, long breathing.</p>
<p>No response is a good response.</p>
<p>Parmesh was happy to note that most children had acclimatized well to the weather. </p>
<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
<p>On the 4th of January, the contingent returned to Leh and headed to Khardung La Pass, at 18,300 feet above sea level, in the Karakoram Range. They had trekked almost 17,500 feet when they realized that the route was under repair and the consequent possibility of landslides. So they returned to Leh.</p>
<p>The next day they headed to Pangong Lake in a 16-seater van. En route, near Chang La pass, they stopped for tea at Tsoltak Lake. The children loved to have tea in small tea stalls on winding roads amidst luxurious snow cover. Besides, sipping on steaming tea every now and then was a necessity in the cold, damp climate to pull up their spirits. The children climbed back into the vehicle.</p>
<p>‘<em>Arre, eh kya kiya maine!</em>’ (Oh! What did I do?) The driver sighed. He turned the ignition key several times, but the van only made a clicking sound and didn’t start up.</p>
<p>‘Oh! What happened, Sir?’ Anand asked.</p>
<p>Sekhar Babu explained, ‘The driver switched off the engine by mistake. At these temperatures, if the engine is not running, the diesel freezes. Drivers generally do not turn off the engine during short stops.’</p>
<p>As much as the driver tried, the vehicle would not start. Since traction is very low on snow surfaces, the driver put snow chains to the wheels of the van as a precaution to prevent the vehicle from slipping. </p>
<p>The children huddled inside the van. Parmesh and Wing Commander Sridharan were making rounds to beat the cold. Sekhar Babu and the driver were trying different ways and means to defreeze the diesel in the engine. </p>
<p>A slow-moving army truck pulled up to the side, and a few army men got off the vehicle. </p>
<p>‘<em>Kahan jana</em>…?’ (where are you headed?) they asked in a familiar accent. They belonged to the Madras (Chennai) Regiment. Most of them hailed from Telangana. They invited the children to their camp. The entire contingent climbed into the army van. </p>
<p>Bharathi, however, didn’t get off the van. </p>
<p>‘Come on, beta. Get down,’ Paramesh called out to her. But she didn’t move. She was shivering vigorously. </p>
<p>Parmesh cajoled her again. She was adamant. Her lips were trembling.</p>
<p>‘No. No. I won’t,’ she managed to say amidst gasps.</p>
<p>‘I won’t come, you go ahead with your Everest expedition. I won’t come.’</p>
<p>Paramesh went into the van and sat next to her. It took a lot of talking to get her out of the van and into the army truck. </p>
<p>The children were obviously worried and tensed, Sekhar explained, ‘You already know atmospheric pressure reduces at high altitudes. The lungs have to work harder to take in more oxygen. And when the lungs are unable to do so, the reduced intake of oxygen affects the brain. Brain function slows down.’</p>
<p>Sekhar always gave children as much information as possible. These were life lessons. Besides, this is the best way to prepare the children, since the Everest Expedition was to be scheduled shortly.</p>
<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
<p>The army men were pleased to have these little children as their guests and offered them chocolates. They opened a 15 kg carton of raisins and asked them to take as many as they wished. </p>
<p>Parmesh remembered that the children hadn’t had their lunch. The lunch they had carried in their hot bags had frozen. Sekhar requested the army men to heat up their lunch in the army kitchen. The frozen food clacked in the hot vessel like marbles on a tile floor. </p>
<p>Meanwhile, the army men placed chains around the wheels of their vans for better grip on the snowy road. After a few hours of effort, the diesel liquefied and the engine started. As the route to Pangong Lake was closed, the team visited a temple at Chang La pass, but everyone reminded the driver to keep the engine on! Tired of hearing their constant reminders, he glared at the children in mock anger. The children burst out laughing. They enjoyed bullying the driver. </p>
<p>The children returned after praying and taking ‘ <em>Prasad</em>’ and having tea. Although it was nearly an hour, the engine was kept running. They did not want another dreadful cold day.</p>
<p>The Ladakh Winter Expedition served several purposes. It helped children overcome the fear of cold. They learnt to walk in snow. They spent the nights in sleeping bags and tents. The coaches were able to test their tolerance levels and capacities.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
