<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-007">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Pushing the Boundaries</h1>
<p><strong>20 January 2014<br />11.30 am<br />Office of the Principal Secretary, Social Welfare Department, Andhra Pradesh</strong></p>
<p><span class="big-letter">‘P</span>raveen, what is this?’ Raymond Peter asked, pointing to the file on his table. </p>
 <p>‘Sir, that’s the proposal to send the children to the Everest.’</p>
<p>‘I know. I know, Praveen. But do you understand where we are heading?’</p>
<p>‘Yes, Sir.’</p>
<p>‘The expeditions so far have been a big success. You provided the children with a wonderful opportunity at an early age. This is a dream for course mountaineers across the world. Don’t you think that the Ladakh expedition is success enough for the children?’</p>
<p>‘Sir, I believe the children can scale greater heights. I see immense potential.’</p>
<p>‘These children don’t have to prove anything to anyone. You have gone crazy. Sending them to the DEATH ZONE!’ he said sternly.</p>
<p>Raymond stood up from his chair and walked toward Praveen Kumar. In a low voice, he said, ‘Do you not understand? There is no scope for such crazy thoughts. These are very young children. This is literally a matter of life and death! Lives are at stake, Praveen. It’s too risky.’</p>
<p>‘I know, Sir. I am aware. I know that I would be stoned to death if something goes wrong. I know that all of them are minors. And the government will be held responsible if something goes wrong.’</p>
<p>Raymond Peter paced back and forth.</p>
<p>‘<em>Something? Everything</em> is wrong. <em>Nothing </em>is right. You want to risk these young lives?’</p>
<p>‘Praveen, please understand. I know...I know that you’ve invested a lot of conviction here. But this is not going to work. If I pass this proposal, I will be putting you in a tight spot. You may lose your job.’</p>
<p>Praveen Kumar had expected this reaction from his boss. </p>
<p>‘Sir, <em>you</em> have belief in my conviction. Then, why not try?’ he said in a very relaxed tone. ‘Sir, I know that we both believe in creating opportunities for our children. Why should we hold ourselves back? They have it in them, Sir. They can touch the DEATH ZONES.’</p>
<p>Raymond Peter pulled out the proposal from the file and read it. He signed and submitted the file to the government. </p>
<p>However, the government rejected the proposal. Word spread among official circles of the Department of Welfare.</p>
<p>One of Praveen’s colleagues said, ‘It is foolish to spend this kind of money on these few children. There are a lot of schools that need better infrastructure – toilets, classrooms, desks, library…’</p>
<p><em>True. But how about making an inspiring story that could emancipate and liberate the underprivileged from the yoke of slavery? </em>This was Praveen’s argument.</p>
<p>Raymond Peter forwarded the file to the Finance Department, but in vain. Then he sent it to the Sports Department.</p>
<p>The Sports Department said: It is our duty. Why are you doing it?</p>
<p><em>Exactly! Why are we doing it instead of the Sports department? History has an answer to this question!</em></p>
<p>‘<em>Bacchon ke saath panga kyon lena?</em>. (Why take a chance with children?) Send them to a few more rock-climbing courses, forest trecks or hikes. <em>Bacche hain na</em>?’ (They are kids, after all!). </p>
<p>The proposal was met with resistance from all quarters. Praveen Kumar’s conviction didn’t wane. It only grew stronger. However, Managing Director of Sports Authority of Andhra Pradesh, Rahul Bojja gauged the potential of the mission. He was also perhaps influenced by the values instilled by his activist father. His positive remarks on the expedition worked in Praveen Kumar’s favour.</p>
<p>After he received the necessary approval, Praveen met Raymond Peter. He said, ‘I will take complete responsibility, sir.’</p>
<p>Raymond Peter sighed. ‘Right, Praveen. I hope you understand. If everything goes well, you win. Else, the sword will fall on your neck.’</p>
<p>‘I am prepared to put my head on the block. I know it’s worth the risk. This expedition will be successful, and the country will be proud, and it will go down in history.’</p>
<p>Praveen met Shamsher Singh Rawat, Secretary to the Chief Minister, another tech savvy, out of the box thinker. Rawat’s relatives, hailing from the Himalyan State of Uttarakhand, had scaled Mount Everest long ago.</p>
<p>Rawat was well informed about Praveen; his origins in the Police Department; the voluntary transfer to the Welfare Department and his achievements so far; and now, this craze that has gotten hold of him. Rawat had accompanied the Chief Minister on his visit to the Social Welfare Schools and had seen first-hand the progress made under Praveen’s leadership. </p>
<p>Rawat was astute. He was discerning. He advised the Chief Minister, ‘The children must go, Sir. I have not seen another officer so keen on creating history with such young children and especially from the underprivileged background. The children truly deserve this opportunity. And we have enough evidence to prove their physical fitness and mental tenacity.’</p>
<p>The Chief Minister, a sports person himself, approved the proposal.</p>
<p>Raymond Peter called Praveen Kumar and Sekhar Babu to his office. </p>
<p>‘So, gentlemen, here is what you have been waiting for.’</p>
<p>He handed them the Government Order. </p>
<p>‘Congratulations! This is a moment to celebrate… your commitment and perseverance.’</p>
<p>Praveen read the Government Order. </p>
<p><em>To </em></p>
<p><em>The Secretary,</em></p>
<p>Praveen reread it. </p>
<p><em>To </em></p>
<p><em>The Secretary,</em></p>
<p><em>This can’t be,</em> he thought. <em>This is a breach of protocol. There can never be such a glaring error in a </em>Government Order.</em></p>
<p>He raised his head and said, ‘Sir…’</p>
<p>He stopped midway, murmuring, ‘Oh! Okay. Okay. The letter is addressed directly to me instead of the Principal Secretary. I get it now. No one should be held responsible for my madness.’ He nodded dramatically. </p>
<p>He showed the Government Order to Sekhar Babu. </p>
<p>Sekhar Babu frowned. </p>
<p>‘Only for two! Not for four?’ </p>
<p>Poorna, Anand, Satya Rao and Gangadhar were selected after the winter expedition. The rest of the children quit voluntarily, or their parents refused to allow them to proceed further. </p>
<p>‘Yes. Only for two. We were advised to invest all our focus on two than four for best outcomes. The budget is R 69 lakhs. That’s enough for two children.’</p>
<p>‘So, I have to choose one of the three boys.’</p>
<p>‘Yes.’</p>
<p>‘<em>Yeh kya hain, </em>(What is this?) Sir? The other two boys will be heart broken.’</p>
<p>‘I know. But there’s not much we can do about it. One girl one boy.</p>
<p>Sekhar Babu pitied the boys. </p>
<p><em>I will ensure the other two boys will also make it to the Everest. Everest is there forever. If not now, then next year...</em></p>
<p>‘Sekhar, I really, deeply wish that our children summit the Everest!’</p>
<p>‘Your commitment and enthusiasm have rubbed off on me too,’ Sekhar Babu said. ‘It’s my dream, too; to see that the children succeed. They must become a model for inspiration,’ he said in a tone of sincerity and resolve.</p>
<p>‘Sekhar…. you may not stand to benefit in monetary terms, you know…’</p>
<p>Noticing the fine lines of worry and concern on Praveen’s forehead, ‘Sir,’ interrupted Sekhar. ‘Your interest is in creating opportunities for the underprivileged. My interest is in promoting mountaineering. The world must know that the sublime experience of mountaineering is unparalleled.’</p>
<p>They shared a moment of heavy silence. </p>
<p>‘I will take leave now. I will keep you updated, Sir.’ </p>
<p>He went straight to see Parmesh. He was planning a thorough evaluation of each of the three boys. </p>
<p>Poorna couldn’t be dropped for two reasons. Her inclusion would establish gender parity. But the more important reason was that despite being younger than the boys, she had shown superior performance throughout the program. </p>
<p>Praveen Kumar and Raymond Peter were left alone in the room. They looked at each other. ‘Congratulations!’ they said at the same time.</p>
<p>That evening Praveen and Raymond Peter received an SMS from Sekhar Babu.</p>
<p>‘Anand and Poorna – finalists.’</p>
<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
<p>‘Poorna,’ the class teacher called out. Poorna was busy copying notes. ‘This circular says that you have to be sent to Hyderabad for training.’ </p>
<p>Poorna instantly knew that this was related to the Everest Expedition. ‘Poorna, you are selected for the Everest Expedition.’ </p>
<p>Poorna’s joy was expressed only through her bright, twinkling eyes. </p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
