<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-008">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Toughening Up for the Heights</h1>
		<p><strong>5 February 2014<br />5.00 am<br />Gowlidoddi, IIT-Medicom Training Academy</strong></p>
		<p><span class="big-letter">T</span>wo pairs of feet moved rhythmically on the tracks of the field. The bright halogen lights tracked them by their shadows. Poorna and Anand, the finalists for the Himalayan Expedition jogged for a couple of rounds and did a few stretches to loosen their muscles. The warm up was followed by yoga, under the instructions of Venugopal. The yoga session included <em>Pranayama </em>(breathing exercises), twelve cycles of <em>Suryanamaskara </em>and a few <em>asanas </em>(Yoga postures) to enhance flexibility, balance and awareness of their bodies. The morning session concluded with ten minutes of <em>Shavasana</em> (Corpse pose) for body relaxation and a twenty-minute meditation session for calming the mind.</p>
		<p>After breakfast, by 8.30 am Poorna would rush to Magnet School and Anand to IIT-Medicom Training Academy and Junior College, which were adjacent to each other. Poorna and her trainer Srilatha lodged at Magnet School while Anand was at IIT-Medicom Training Academy</p>
		<p>They would return at 3.30  pm to their respective accommo dations. After having light refreshments, they joined Parmesh for the evening workout: warm up, stretching, jogging and two rounds of 200 meters. </p>
		<p>The morning and evening workout remained the same, except for jogging and sprinting. Each morning, they jogged twice as many rounds as the previous day. An extra round of sprinting was added every day for three days. No additions were made over the next four days. Then a round was added every day for another four days. This pattern continued until 120 rounds were covered in an hour and a half. This entire exercise helped increase lung capacity. The evening workout was reduced to half of the morning routine. The yoga regimen and the stretches were, however repeated in the evening. The children also played a game of volleyball or kho- kho. </p>
		<p>They also did several calf, shoulder and thigh strengthening exercises. They would run carrying weights in their backpacks. Apart from strengthening the back, this technique enhanced their capacity to breathe deep, in preparation to climb high altitudes with their ruck sacks. They wound up by 6.30 pm.</p>
		<p>The week-end regimen was tougher. Parmesh would take Poorna and Anand to Bhongir rock. To strengthen their backs, the children with heavy weights in their rucksacks were made to run up and down the 550 feet at least thrice. They also played the role of belayers for climbers who were train ing at Bhongir rock. Belaying needs enormous shoulder strength. Although Poorna and Anand found the belaying exercise difficult in the beginning, they soon got accustomed to it. </p>
		<p>Among all the exercises, ‘duck walk’ was the toughest. It enhances the dexterity of muscles and relaxes the legs after a strenuous workout. Softball practice strengthened the wrist, fingers and forearms – the key players in climbing.</p>
		<p>Parmesh’s assistant Anil and residential school PET Srilatha monitored the training routine when Parmesh and Sekhar were busy with preparations for the expedition. </p>
		<p>The children were on a special protein diet for muscle strengthening. Breakfast included milk and eggs. They had chicken for lunch or dinner. Fresh fruits such as banana, pomegranate, figs and dry fruits were part of their diet. Vitamin supplements were also provided.</p>
		<p>Like most teenage children, Poorna resisted eating. She negotiated with Anand and Srilatha. Srilatha was very strict. She threatened that she would complain to Parmesh about her poor eating habits. Poorna was quite scared of Parmesh from the beginning. Yet, at times, when no one was watching, she would quickly transfer food from her plate to Anand’s plate. One day, she was caught red-handed. Since then, Srilatha made sure the two sat separately and sat right next to Poorna to ensure that she emptied her plate. </p>
		<p>Anand and Poorna hardly knew each other before the Ladakh Winter Expedition. They bonded very well now and enjoyed each other’s company. Anand called her <em>chinna</em> (the sweet one, a term of endearment) and Poorna called him <em>annayya (brother)</em>. They forged a mutually caring relationship. </p>
		<p>After a couple of weeks, Parmesh introduced a new physical training technique to maximize their lung capacity. The children had to sprint 100 meters back and forth, followed by a few sit-ups; the next sprint would be followed by push-ups, knee squats and half squats. This cycle of exercise left the children completely drained and exhausted. </p>
		<p>Breathing heavily and sweat trickling down her face, Poorna said, ‘ <em>Annayya</em>, do you really think we have to do so much?’</p>
		<p>‘I wonder too, <em>chinna</em>. But they know better. Climbing Mount Everest is no child’s play.’</p>
		<p>‘But climbing is easy <em>annayya</em>. We have climbed Mount Renock. This is just a few thousand meters higher.’</p>
		<p>‘Well, you never know. The challenges may be different,’ Anand wiped the sweat off his brow.</p>
		<p>The fitness levels and vitals were continuously monitored. At the beginning of the training program, Poorna weighed only 39 kg. By the end of the program, she had gained 10 to 11 kg.</p>
		<p>One Saturday noon, Sekhar Babu and Parmesh came to meet the children. Parmesh carried a laptop. They showed the children photographs and videos of Mount Everest. Sekhar Babu briefed the students about the extreme conditions on Mount Everest. He spoke about the cold winds that swept at a speed of 150 km and the phenomena of landslides. He showed pictures of crevices, the huge gaps between two mountains and videos of how to cross crevices with the Atriar (the technical term for a sling ladder). He showed pictures of different types of frostbites – at the skin, muscle and bone levels. He gave tips on how to avoid frostbites.</p>
		<p>Innocence breeds fearlessness in children. Children are less inhibited in trying out new things. But the same qualities must be tempered with knowledge. Otherwise, innocence and fearlessness can become detrimental to success and turn dangerous. Sekhar Babu believed that the children must be given all information about the challenges and dangers that they might encounter during their Mount Everest Expedition as well as preventive measures and precautions to be exercised. He took upon himself the onus to empower them with complete factual and relevant information. However, he was careful not to scare them. The possibility of accidents and death were looming large in his mind. But he was very positive and infused positivity in the children.</p>
		<p>Sekhar Babu pointed to his trimmed beard and said, ‘I can’t shave this beard completely, you know.’</p>
		<p>‘Oh! Why, Sir?’</p>
		<p>‘Because he has chill burns,’ said Parmesh.</p>
		<p>‘Oh! Like the one Mohan had at Darjeeling’. </p>
		<p>‘Yes. It can be completely treated or partially managed, depending on the extent of the damage.’</p>
		<p>‘I summited Everest the first time on bare minimum sponsorship. The only thing that mattered to me then was that I had to summit the Everest at any cost. I didn’t take enough safety precautions. That’s why the chill burns…,’ said Sekhar Babu.</p>
		<p>Sekhar Babu stretched out his bare foot. The tip of his big toe on the right leg was missing. </p>
		<p>‘I had skin-level frostbite during one of my expeditions, and hence, this part of my toe had to be amputated. At a deeper level, it may affect the muscle and even the bone. So, we have to be careful and ensure we wear appropriate mountaineering gear.’</p>
		<p>Poorna and Anand examined the toe. </p>
		<p>‘Take care of yourselves. Eat well. Maintain good hygiene. Keep your fingers, nails and toes clean and use them carefully. Make sure you don’t fall ill,’ Parmesh patted their back, and both of them left.</p>
		<p>For the first time, the children understood the enormity of the challenges and forces they were up against. This conversation had the desired impact on Poorna and Anand. They became more committed to their mission. It induced a process of building mental resilience toward a mission; a mission that would shortly become a singular focus point; every breath they took, every word they uttered, every act, conscious and sub-conscious, were geared to embrace one of the greatest natural forces of this planet they inhabited. The micro-consciousness of their ‘being’ bloomed to encompass the enormous panorama of the Great Himalayan force. Perhaps, this was also the beginning of their spiritual journey. What can be more spiritual in quality, than a little child hardening every nerve in the body, realigning all energies of the physical being, transcending the mundane, investing in oneself a confidence and faith that goes beyond all reason? The children were striving for an experience that could be life altering and empowering. </p>
		<p>The children complained about nothing thereafter. They knew what they had to do. They knew what it took to be able to pursue their mission. The next morning, Poorna and Anand arrived earlier than usual for training.</p>
		<p>One evening, when Poorna and Anand were on the seventieth lap on the track, they saw a figure approaching, dressed in track suit and sneakers. They recognized him by his gait. Praveen Kumar, it was! Praveen Kumar began to run alongside them. A fresh burst of energy charged them. </p>
		<p>Parmesh watched them, the three dark, lean figures running on the track. The torch bearer and his two committed warriors. As the sun sank in the West, the three shadows ran relentlessly with energy and vigour. </p>
		<p>‘A moment to treasure,’ he thought.</p>
		<p>Perfectionism. Perseverance. Passion.</p>
		<p>Three qualities they shared. </p>
		<p>Sekhar Babu joined Parmesh. The children were in the 120th lap. Parmesh blew the whistle and asked them to stop.</p>
		<p>After a few relaxation exercises and stretches, they called it a day. Stood at a distance Praveen Kumar had watched doing push-ups. She counted till thirty and ran when she was called for dinner. </p>
		<p>The routine of practice and studies continued till mid-March. Over these days, with the right diet and systemic training, Poorna had gained 12 kg. </p>
		<p>It was now time to write their final exams. That evening, Poorna and Anand sat munching on chocolate before the evening practice. Anand found her in an exceptionally jolly mood and asked her, ‘What is it?’</p>
		<p>‘<em>Anna</em>, today is the last day of practice. We are going back to school tomorrow.’</p>
		<p>‘And?’</p>
		<p>‘We will resume training after our examinations.’</p>
		<p>‘Are you happy to go back?’</p>
		<p>‘Yes, of course! It’s been so long. I want to meet all my friends. Don’t you want to go? Aren’t you happy?’</p>
		<p>‘Hell, I want to go.’ He smiled. ‘But, you and I… we won’t meet.’</p>
		<p>Poorna thought for a while. ‘Yes, <em>annayya</em>. That’s true. But we can do one thing. I will give my PET Madam’s number. Call me after every exam and tell me how you’ve performed. At least, we will get to talk to each other every day.’</p>
		<p>Anand was glad, and they exchanged a hi-five. Parmesh walked into the ground. They ran to him. </p>
		<p>‘Do we have practice today, Sir?</p>
		<p>‘Why do you ask, Anand?’ </p>
		<p>‘Sir, is today the last day of practice? Are we going back to school tomorrow?’</p>
		<p>‘Yes. Sekhar Babu will tell you more about that.’</p>
		<p>‘But today, I want to see how far you can stretch yourselves. Push yourselves. I want to test your endurance.’</p>
		<p>He blew the whistle. Poorna and Anand looked at him puzzled. </p>
		<p>‘Now GO…’ </p>
		<p>The children finished their jog and then did their warm up exercise and stretches. </p>
		<p>Parmesh instructed the children to run till he called off. </p>
		<p>They got to the track and started running. At first, their pace was slow. Gradually they picked up speed. Then slowed down again. Before the Ladakh Expedition too, they had practised this technique of increasing and decreasing pace. Poorna and Anand jogged in opposite directions at about the same speed. They exchanged a quiet glance every time they crossed each other.</p>
		<p>‘Speed up,’ Parmesh shouted. They picked up speed.</p>
		<p>Parmesh counted till hundred. Parmesh walked closer to the tracks to get a better view of them. Poorna easily completed the 120th round covering a distance of 24 km, which she did every day. From the 130th round, their pace dropped. </p>
		<p>He pushed them. ‘ <em>Arey</em>! Why did you slow down? RUN.’ </p>
		<p>He screamed at the top of his voice. </p>
		<p>The children increased their pace immediately. They made another 20 rounds at this pace. Their socks were drenched in sweat. Poorna managed another seven rounds after which her legs were beginning to give way. She felt her legs would soon buckle. Parmesh went toward her and held her by her shoulder. Anand dragged himself for another four rounds and came back gasping heavily. </p>
		<p>After a five-minute rest, they were asked to do stretches.</p>
		<p>Parmesh noted:</p>
		<p>Poorna nonstop running record: 31.4 km</p>
		<p>Anand nonstop running record: 32.2 km</p>
		<p>Poorna and Anand returned to their residential schools to write their final exams. Special instructions were given to the PETs to ensure they maintained their routine of diet and exercise. </p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
