<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-009">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Bon Voyage</h1>
<p><strong>6 April 2014<br />5.45 am<br />Secunderabad Railway Station</strong></p>
<p><span class="big-letter">T</span>he AP express was set to leave the station in fifteen minutes. For a small group of people on the platform, these were anxious moments. </p>
<p>Praveen Kumar stood at a distance, answering phone calls. Poorna and Anand were talking animatedly with their PETs. They were on the threshold of a journey to achieve a goal; a goal, that <em>he</em> had envisioned for his Swaeroes. It is not just a journey to conquer the Everest; but, a journey toward equality to be achieved through sheer hard work and determination.</p>
<p>Parmesh and Mannan were making last-minute checks. The principals of the two schools, Venugopal and a few administrative staff of Social Welfare Residential Schools were in deep discussion.</p>
<p>Devidas, Poorna’s father and Kondal Rao, Anand’s father were squatting near a pillar. They exchanged a word or two every now and then. </p>
<p>Praveen Kumar tried to fathom their thoughts and feelings at that moment. But in, vain.</p>
<p><em>Am I doing the right thing? They have entrusted their precious children to my hands, not knowing what the future holds; prepared for both, glory or tragedy!</em></p>
<p>He felt a surge of compassionate warmth toward these souls; steeped in poverty, at the margins of society; uneducated and living a way of life that is as basic as it could get; and, not allowing their filial love and affection to be deterrents to their children’s future. Sending them away from home to a residential school is one thing; sending them away to the mighty laps of nature, malevolent and benevolent at once, hoping and praying that it will protect and nurture their children, is another thing altogether. At this moment, for Praveen, <em>they</em> were the heroes.</p>
<p>He walked toward them with long strides. He stopped short. There he was before Devidas and Kondal Rao. He felt overwhelmed. He exercised restraint lest he appear sentimental. Devidas sprang up to his feet. His worn out, tired face made him look atleast a decade older than he really was. Eking out two square meals a day was the biggest challenge of his life. Yet, his eyes displayed a steely resolve, a reflection of which he had seen in Poorna’s eyes. </p>
<p>‘Devidas, I hope you are completely sure. Let me know…let me know if you are even slightly unsure; or, if you have any misgivings. We can stop her right now.’</p>
<p>Devidas’ eyes brimmed with tears. He wiped his eyes with the edge of the towel lying over his shoulder, looked at Praveen, his small eyes glistening amidst folds of skin, ‘Sir, I am fine.’</p>
<p>He swallowed the fear that stuck in his throat like a lump. </p>
<p>‘She must go and come back, victorious.’</p>
<p>Kondal Rao leaned against the pillar. His wife Lakshmi hadn’t come to see their son off as she had suddenly taken ill. Praveen Kumar asked Kondal Rao, ‘Are you willing to send your son? Please tell me if you have a change of mind. I can stop him even now.’ </p>
<p>Anand’s father held Praveen’s hands and laughed nervously even as his eyes filled. ‘Sir, I gave my son away to you the moment I admitted him to school. He is now your child. He belongs to you.’</p>
	<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
<p>Praveen, along with Mannan and Parmesh had met Devidas and Kondal Rao a couple of months ago to apprise them of the dangers of the expedition and to complete the necessary formalities. In fact, before each expedition, Praveen Kumar made it a point to meet the parents. When the children embarked on the Ladakh expedition, the parents, for the first time, had realized that this was no child’s play, but serious business. However, since it was a government-sponsored expedition, they were more at ease; but, the real reason to send their children was that they shared Praveen Kumar’s vision and had complete trust in him. Although Devidas and Lakshmi had seen a few pictures of Poorna and her team summiting Mount Renock and of the Ladakh expedition, the Himalayan expedition was like none other. Hence, Praveen Kumar sought parental consent only after giving them a clear and honest picture of what the children were up against. Praveen counseled the parents about the entire expedition and the dangers and risks integral to and inevitable in an expedition of this magnitude. </p>
<p>Praveen Kumar first invited Devidas and Lakshmi into his office. He showed videos of the conditions prevailing on Mount Everest, the possible risks of becoming handicapped or worse, never returning. Lakshmi’s face turned ashen. Her lips quivered, and hands trembled when she saw visuals of dead bodies hanging midair amidst the pristine white mountains or half buried in snow. She outrightly refused to send her child. She broke into a cold sweat and started weeping.</p>
<p>Poorna excused herself and took her parents out of the room. </p>
<p>‘<em>Beta</em>. This is not the right thing to do. I don’t want you to go. I just want you to study well and get a good job. That’s enough!’</p>
<p>‘<em>Yadi</em>, <em>maaku jukoni samazhl </em>(Nothing will happen to me). I will come back for sure. Believe me. Do you know how many children are studying in residential schools? A few lakhs. Out of them, only two are selected, and I am one of them.’ </p>
<p>She looked at her father. ‘ <em>Baa, </em>(father) <em> </em>I am one of those two. Please send me.’</p>
<p>While Poorna tried to assure her parents, Praveen and Parmesh spoke to Kondal Rao. He saw all the photographs and videos. He listened to all that Praveen had to tell him with surprising calm. A sense of resignation swept across his face. He sighed deeply and took the pen. </p>
<p>Praveen said, ‘Kondal Rao, think about it. Your son might come back badly hurt. Or he might not...’</p>
<p>‘I know, Sir,’ his voice quivered. ‘The day I admitted him to the residential school, I gave away all rights to you. Now you are his guardian. He belongs to the school. You and your department will shape his future. I only gave birth to him. I don’t want him to miss opportunities just because he is born to me. God will surely watch over my son.’</p>
<p>Praveen and Parmesh were also in deep turmoil. </p>
<p>Parmesh had interacted with these two children for nearly eight months now. This is <em>his</em> team. He had trained and molded them. He thought about them all the time. He constantly planned and revised his own training methods to get the best out of the children. In a few days, they would be reaching the DEATH ZONE. </p>
<p>He has himself experienced first-hand, the magnetism of the Himalayas as a mountaineer. He knows that nothing can stop the children from this point onwards. Initially, it is only a fascination. The beauty captivates you. The enormity leaves you in awe. Then slowly, the Himalayas begin to grow on you, unobtrusively. It enters your sub-conscious. It becomes a part of you. Then you are at the mercy of the Himalayas. You surrender to the Himalayas. </p>
<p>He has invested his emotions in these children. He has trained them like a mother eagle teaching her fledglings to fly. The mother eagle pushes her little ones into the vast expanse, well aware of the dangers they are bound to confront. But there is no other way. </p>
<p>Parmesh got up and went toward the window for some fresh air. </p>
<p>This is serious business. But there is no other way. The line between thinking and doing is very thin. Or, at least, that is what one thinks. But, when the final call has to be made, the same thin line marks life from death. And, it suddenly becomes insurmountable. He loves them. God knows. He closed his eyes in prayer. <em>God, let them come back safe. Whether they summit or not, doesn’t matter to me anymore. They are only buds, just about blossoming. Please do not let them wither away.</em></p>
<p>Praveen pulled up a stool and sat close to the children. He said, in a soft tone, affectionately, ‘You must earn laurels. Poorna and Anand should be the pride of Social Welfare Residential Schools.’</p>
<p>‘Sir, we will!’ said Poorna. Her eyes twinkled. The enormity of the journey she was about to embark upon had sunk into her. All the more reason, she smiled and held a poised demeanor to give courage to those loving souls around her. She empathized with them. She knew each one was going through turmoil. </p>
<p>Parmesh, a lawyer himself, had drafted consent on non-judicial stamp papers to be signed by the parents of these minor children. Praveen Kumar had taken a written confirmation from both sets of parents for the Everest Expedition. </p>
<p>Only a few minutes were left for the train to depart from the station. </p>
<p>Mannan walked toward Devidas and Kondal Rao. ‘We have a tradition in our schools to pray for those setting out on any sort of challenge.’ He handed a few pamphlets. ‘Take a look.’ </p>
<p>The pamphlets made an appeal to all students and teachers to pray for the well-being of their friends, who were part of the Ladakh Winter Expedition. Another pamphlet made a similar appeal for the children who were training at HMI, Darjeeling before heading to Mount Renock. </p>
<p>‘Just before Poorna and Anand begin their expedition, we will print new ones. All the children and staff of all the Social Welfare Residential Schools will pray to the Almighty every single day for their safe return.’</p>
<p>Mannan believed in the power of prayer. And perhaps, in this situation, when all humanly possible precautions would be taken, God’s grace was all that one could seek. </p>
<p>The final announcements for the departure of the train filled the air, drowning the chatter of passengers, their kith and kin and the coolies. The train too signaled its departure as the whistle blew. Praveen shook hands with Sekhar Babu, Poorna and Anand for the last time. He <em>may </em>see them after two months. The usually stoic Praveen batted his eyelids to hold back a tear or two. A few hushed sobs were also heard. </p>
<p>Sekhar Babu was surprised by the courage the children displayed at this moment. They wore a big smile on their faces, although forced. A drop of tear precariously hung at the brim of Poorna’s eyes. She managed to force it back. Anand saw her face and took her hand into his as he cast a final look at his father and gave a reassuring smile.</p>
<p>All of them stood dumbstruck as they watched the train leave the platform. A sudden loud sob split the silence. Poorna’s father was crying uncontrollably, covering his face with his towel. Devidas remembered his four-year-old daughter in Pakal who lost her way and boldly waited for him to pick her up after two hours. His daughter is now going to find her way up Mount Everest, all alone. But, he won’t be able to go pick her up if she lost her way. And she may not be able to find her way back home this time. </p>
<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
<p>Meanwhile, Lakshmi sat at home praying to the Gods of Vemulavada, Tirupati and Kondaguttu. She had vowed to go on a pilgrimage to these holy places once her Poorna returned safely. Till such time, she had decided not to reveal Poorna’s expedition to the Himalayas to family, friends, neighbours or relatives. She hadn’t cooked. She hadn’t visited the fields. She had only sat and prayed.</p>
<p>Devidas reached Tadwai the same evening. Lakshmi sat outside her hut, waiting for him. She paced toward him silently. She looked at him only to see Poorna’s dream in his eyes. And she broke into tears. He went inside the house toward the only framed family photo hanging on the wall. He took the photo frame off the wall gently and sat down on the floor. Lakshmi sat next to him. He ran his fingers on Poorna’s face. </p>
<p>He nudged his wife and said, ‘This girl, our daughter,’ he laughed amid tears strolling down his face, ‘you will see her in the newspapers one day! Just you wait.’</p>
<p>Lakshmi took the photo from him and held it close to her bosom. The day Poorna was born. Her first smile. Her first step. The first time she said <em>amma</em>. The first time she hurt herself while playing in the front yard, her escapades from the Anganwadi centers, the day she was dropped to the residential school – all these images, rolled in front of her eyes, frame by frame. Lakshmi and Devidas sat, God knows for how long, travelling back in memory lane, holding each other’s hand, impervious of thirst and hunger, and the fading light of day outside. </p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
