<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-0010">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Sagarmatha - So Close, Yet So Far</h1>
<p><strong>8 April 2014<br />7.00 pm<br />Kathmandu, Nepal</strong></p>
<p><span class="big-letter">K</span>athmandu, the capital of Nepal, all of 50 km, located at a height of 1,300 metres, is a visual treat. Poorna was by now quite familiar with the environs of hill stations at high altitudes. In fact, it was a welcome reprieve from the hot, humid climes back home. She loved the variety of flora and fauna of the hill stations, especially the birds and their songs!</p>
<p>The people, she noticed, had a different appearance. They were shorter, pale skinned and their eyes were a tad smaller. The tinge of a friendly smile and the little gleam of delight in their eyes warmed her. Acclimatisation to weather conditions was never a problem for Poorna, but the change in cuisine was a big one. Anand though enjoyed the Nepali cuisine.</p>
<p>Poorna grew quiet, and she bore a demeanour of seriousness, her eyes watching the surroundings keenly. Anand burst into an exciting volley of questions about the place, the people and the journey henceforth. Poorna, Shekar Babu observed, responded to her environment intuitively; she imbibed the contours and specificities of her environment unconsciously and become a part of it, and it of her. For Anand, it was, however, more an intellectual experience. He sought precise data and information. He read, asked questions and even interacted with people to learn more. He was acutely aware of his ‘self’ as much as of the rest of the world. </p>
<p>That evening Poorna and Anand met mountaineers Surabhi Chawla and Kishore Dhankode, who were to be part of their expedition team. They also met Dr. Narendra Patil who would monitor their health while on the expedition. </p>
<p><strong>9 April 2014</strong></p>
<p>The next morning, they visited the Pashupatinath Temple. They stood in a long queue and offered prayers to Lord Shiva.</p>
<p>After breakfast, they headed to the markets to buy some more equipment. Sekhar Babu bought snow boots, fleece jackets, scarves and trekking shoes, among other equipment for the children. </p>
<p>Anand, Poorna and Sekhar Babu were waiting at the bus stop when Anand leaned on one of the equipment bags, and the bag was about to fall. Poorna prevented the bag from falling. She glared at him and snapped, ‘Keep it safe, <em>annayya</em>. We need this equipment. It is our life-line.’</p>
<p>Sekhar Babu and Anand were taken aback by Poorna’s strong emotional reaction to an innocuous slip. Neither of them had seen her respond with such intensity before. She was known to be stoic. That instant, Sekhar Babu shed his illusions about her. Beneath the small frame of a thirteen-year-old was hidden a mature girl with great fortitude. Poorna worshipped her mountaineering gear. She handled it with great respect. </p>
<p><strong>10 April 2014</strong></p>
<p>Sekhar Babu explained that two base camps were located on either sides of Mount Everest. While the South Base Camp was in Nepal at an altitude of 5,364 meters, the North Base Camp was located in Tibet, at 5,150 meters. They would be travelling to North Base Camp, which required passage through China. This route, Sekhar explained, was less harsh and recorded a lower fatality rate as compared to the other route.</p>
<p>After two days at Kathmandu, the six-member contingent took a bus to Panitanki, a small village in Darjeeling district of West Bengal, lying on the Indo-Nepal border. After clearing immigration formalities, they crossed the Sian-Nepal Friendship Bridge to reach Zangbu, a small Chinese town. Sekhar had meticulously planned the eight-day journey from Delhi to the Everest Base Camp in Tibet. He had ensured frequent over-night halts to facilitate acclimatization.</p>
<p>The journey was quite taxing, despite the breaks. However, the spectacular views of snow-capped mountains eased the mind and heart. The winding roads offered breathtaking views of the valleys nestled between peaks. Zangbu was a clean, neat town with meticulously and artistically aligned houses with simple elevation. Anand was surprised to find the usually fussy Poorna relishing a Chinese meal. The children were amused to find that their hotel rooms had electronic locks instead of the conventional padlocks and key. The rooms were spacious, and they enjoyed the VIP treatment accorded by the hotel staff.</p>
<p>Praveen Kumar called them that night and chatted with them for some time. </p>
<p><strong>11 April 2014</strong></p>
<p>They took a bus to Nyalam (3,743 meters), a small Tibetan town lying on the border of Nepal. Nyalam offers a panoramic view of the Himalayas. The meandering roads made beautiful patterns as it wound its way up the mountains. As they ascended higher altitudes, they caught glimpses of a majestic river glistening in the valley below. </p>
<p>They reached Nyalam by noon. Houses here, Poorna noticed, were built of wood and not concrete. They sat at a hotel, waiting for lunch to arrive. They were amused to see people eating with chopsticks. The children tried their hand at chopsticks, but in vain. They gave up and used spoons instead. </p>
<p>The doctor examined them that night and certified their fitness. They spent the night at the Xizang Nielamu Xueyu Hotel.</p>
<p>The following day, the team trekked up a nearby hill to acclimatize their bodies to the high altitude. They experienced a snow shower for the first time. Since they were appropriately geared, they enjoyed the shower. Poorna so loved the pristine little town, she wished she could stay there forever! </p>
<p>Now, Poorna had developed a distaste for Chinese food and chose Nepalese, instead. That night, Surabhi and the doctor cooked dinner. Everyone enjoyed the meal.</p>
<p>Praveen Kumar called to check on the children late that night. </p>
<p><strong>13 April 2014</strong></p>
<p>The contingent took a bus to Tingri the next morning. The first thing that struck Poorna was that China was a left-hand driving country.</p>
<p>Every journey turned out to be more blissful that the other; and every view, a feast for the eyes. En route, they saw debris from recent landslides. They reached Tingri by noon. </p>
<p>‘This is paradise on Earth!’ said Poorna. </p>
<p>‘Paradise reminds me of Gymsam of Ladakh,’ said Anand. </p>
<p>They laughed out loud when they heard that the name of their hotel was Hahoo Hotel. Since the temperature here was quite low, Sekhar Babu took them out for an acclimatization walk. The Doctor once again examined the children and the other two members of the team and certified their fitness. </p>
<p><strong>14 April 2014</strong></p>
<p>Fourteenth April is a special day for Swaeroes as it marks Ambedkar’s birthday. Poorna and Anand wished each other. They were happy when Mannan called them. He told them that he was in touch with their parents, updating them about their well-being and progress. The children hoped to hear from Praveen Kumar as well, but they learnt that he was busy participating in programs scheduled for the special day. </p>
<p>The team trekked nearly 4,670 metres when they suddenly spotted the Everest amidst the mountains! For Poorna, this was a surreal experience. The howling chilly winds absorbed her existence. Between the mountains, far away, the Everest stood like a Sage. Yes, like a Sage, consciously, observing the course of life but oblivious to its joys, sorrows and struggles. Its nonchalance and detachment to human life sent shivers up her spine.</p>
<p>‘If I have managed to arrive <em>here</em>, then I certainly <em>can </em>and <em>will </em>reach the summit.’ </p>
<p>It was past 7 o’ clock on her watch, and the sunlight hadn’t faded into darkness. Poorna sat watching the hues of green dancing to the mild zephyr and the hills beyond. ‘It is a special day, indeed,’ Poorna said to herself. </p>
<p><strong>15 April 2014</strong></p>
<p>Another day had passed by. Another day would take birth. And yet another day, she will summit the Everest.</p>
<p>The team reached the Everest Base Camp by late noon. Mount Everest was clearly visible from the Base Camp. On this day, in the month of May, the site of the camp had reasonably good weather, varying between 15˚c high and 0˚c low. The ground was naked, free from snow. The Quianjingou River remains frozen the entire month. </p>
<p>Each member was given a tent. The dining tent was large enough to accommodate about 30 people. Poorna loved the food that was served here. The noons were quite warm. </p>
<p>The Everest Base Camp, run by liaison officers of the Defence Department was richly diverse. People from different countries, speaking different languages and practicing diffe rent religions arrive here with the sole purpose of experiencing and summiting the Everest. They all share one thing in common – undying passion for mountaineering! The Everest Base Camp works as a waiting area for climbers to start their Everest ascent based on weather reports. This Camp is well equipped with all logistics necessary for living. Multiple huge tents double up as a kitchen, dining area, rest area, among others. Diet meals are prepared for mountaineers. A robust mobile phone and satellite phone network are in place. Climbers can call from Camp 3 to the Base Camp and to anywhere in India via the satellite phones.</p>
<p>Television is also available for entertainment.</p>
<p>‘<em>Annayya</em>…isn’t this amazing? We are finally here,’ Poorna said with irrepressible excitement. </p>
<p><strong>16 April 2014</strong></p>
<p>The next morning, she stepped out of her tent to brush her teeth. The sky was clear, and she looked around to see if she could locate the Everest. She remembered seeing it from the Kanchenjunga stretch. After a few seconds, she was surprised to find the Everest closer than expected. She hurriedly brushed and rushed to Sekhar and Anand. </p>
<p>‘Sir,’ she shouted, ‘It is so close…can we start right away, Sir?’</p>
<p>Sekhar and Anand stopped talking and looked at her puzzled. Poorna pointed toward her new discovery. </p>
<p>‘Sir, <em>daggarne kada </em>(close enough, right), why can’t we start now and return by evening?’ </p>
<p>Sekhar comprehended the implication of her words and laughed.</p>
<p>‘Yeah, yeah! Why not? Find your way, <em>peddamma (big girl)</em>. You think it’s so easy, huh?’ </p>
<p>He was amused at her innocence! The enormity of the task ahead of her loomed large on his horizon. </p>
<p><em>What’s the fuss all about</em>, wondered Poorna. </p>
<p>‘It’s very close, isn’t it? Do you know what it takes to reach the Everest? You will have to touch the borders of the <em>DEATH ZONE</em>. And you have to come back alive. These nine kilometres, as short a distance as it may sound, is equal to a few weeks of expedition, driving the very life out of your body and, hopefully, gulping it back.’</p>
<p><em>Yeah! The DEATH ZONE. </em>Poorna muttered in annoyance.</p>
<p>‘Is it that risky, Sir? I think we will come back safe. We’ll not die. But once we come back, we will be treated special. <em>Chinna</em>, remember how we were treated after Mount Renock summit. We met the CM, and the Deputy CM felicitated us. Now it is Mount Everest,’ said Anand casting a glance at Mount Everest, ‘Wow… we will soon be famous.’</p>
<p>Sekhar cleared his throat. </p>
<p>‘<em>Babu</em>…let me tell you something. Success should become a part of history and of books; don’t ever let it get into your head. Because, once it gets into your head, you are finished, forever. We must only do what we believe in with due diligence. Let people record that on our behalf; for us, every milestone achieved should only be the starting point for another milestone. Do you understand?’</p>
<p>Anand smiled. ‘Yes, Sir,’ he said, embarrassed.</p>
<p>‘Good. Now, let’s get a good night’s sleep.’</p>
<p>Poorna couldn’t fall asleep immediately that night. She wondered what her parents would be doing. Her father must be resting on the <em>navvar</em> bed in the front yard. It must be very hot. They would be thinking of her, of course. She hoped Mannan is keeping them informed of her well-being. </p>
<p>The night sky was jubilant. The sky at Pakala was also clear but never this dense with stars. The stars and the mountains! They belong to each other! Perhaps the mountains lend their luminescence to the starts at night, before going to sleep. The stars watch over them and return their light in the morning. </p>
<p><strong>17 April 2014</strong></p>
<p>The next morning, Sekhar woke them up quite early. </p>
<p>‘Sir, are we leaving today?’ Anand peeped out of his sleeping bag.</p>
<p>Poorna had the same question.</p>
<p>‘<em>Nahi re</em>, not yet. Let us go roam around a bit.’</p>
<p><em>Acclimatization</em>, Poorna said to herself, <em>otherwise, Acute Mountain Sickness</em>. </p>
<p>They went out for a short trek every day for the next four days. Poorna marveled the beauty of each mountain – mountains draped in white, dappled with brown spots of earth. Mornings were bright. Nights were freezing. They would slip into the sleeping bags and resist waking up in the morning. Sekhar used to encourage them to spend as much time as possible outside the tent. The noons were warm and cozy. </p>
<p>‘You will fall sick, if you stay inside the tent too much,’ he would say.</p>
<p>Sekhar took advantage of every resource available. He made his team walk with crampons on the frozen river. He occasionally took them out for lunch to the nearby Tibetan villages to try the local food. Usually, this ritual was preceded by a trek. </p>
<p>Poorna, Anand and Sekhar enjoyed every moment of their stay at Everest Base Camp. Sekhar knew what it meant for these young children to be away from the comfort of their home and friends. He kept the children at ease at all times. The children too never fussed about anything. They had learned to make do with whatever was available. Well, they hadn’t exactly <em>learned</em>. That <em>was</em> a way of life for them anyway. They sometimes played <em>antakshari </em>and were surprised when Sekhar Babu beat them. </p>
<p>Several mountaineers had halted at the Everest Base camp and were seen trekking nearby mountains to acclimatize themselves. They were surprised to see such young children attempting the Everest. A few thought the attempt was nothing but ridiculous!</p>
<p><strong>18 April 2014</strong></p>
<p>The next morning, Anand told Poorna over breakfast that he had overheard Sekhar Babu speaking to Praveen Kumar and praising Poorna for her endurance. </p>
<p>Shekar Babu had tested their endurance by taking them on a long hike – all the way up to 5,200 meters. The wind was stronger, and the temperature lower. The children are gradually acclimatizing, he noted. Except for a mild headache, there was no other complaint. </p>
<p>Sekhar Babu took the children to participate in the Lama <em>Puja </em>(a prayer ritual), to be performed in front of the <em>Stupa</em> (the divine pilllar) by the <em>sherpas</em> before embarking on an expedition. The <em>Puja</em> is open for all. Then, the <em>sherpas</em> performed a slow dance. Poorna and her team also joined the dance and tried a few simple steps. While dancing, the <em>sherpas</em> were chanting <em>‘Sagarmatha’</em> (forehead of the ocean) and <em>‘Chomolungma’</em> (Goddess Mother of Mountains) – names by which the Everest is referred to in Nepali and Tibetan, respectively. Poorna wondered why Mount Everest is called the <em>Sagarmatha</em>. Sagar means the Ocean. Why would a mountain be addressed as an ocean? Because it is surrounded by ice and snow, which is nothing but water? Would the Himalayas liquify to form an ocean someday?</p>
<p>The contingent visited a Buddhist Cave Monastery. The ancient Buddha statues were elegant and solemn. They took some pictures. Inside the caves, was a labyrinth of smaller cave rooms. The walls were inscribed with the history of the monastery. In the first cave room, they were guided to light oil lamps. Poorna experienced a sense of serenity and peace as the lamps glowed in the darkness of the ancient caves. Time seemed to have come to a standstill. She felt one with herself. </p>
<p>They returned from the monastery, to find a flurry of whispered voices and subdued commotion at the Base Camp premises. The mood at the Base Camp was rather sombre. </p>
<p>‘Derek, what’s the matter?’ Sekhar Babu went into the next tent.</p>
<p>He didn’t come out for a while. Overcome by weariness, Poorna and Anand stepped into their tents to rest. After some time, she felt hungry. She went in search of Sekhar Babu. She found him among a group of people engaged in some serious discussion. </p>
<p>‘Sir, let us go for dinner.’ </p>
<p>Poorna found Sekhar Babu unusually serious. She had never seen him this way before. She was scared. Had she done something to cross him? Is he upset because she does not eat well?</p>
<p>She went to Anand. ‘<em>Annayya</em>, Sir looks very serious. What could it be?’</p>
	<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
<p>Praveen was at a meeting at Bapatla, when his phone rang. It was Raymond Peter.</p>
<p>‘Yes, Sir,’ he said into the phone. </p>
<p>‘Praveen, did you hear the news?’</p>
<p>‘What news, Sir?’</p>
<p>Raymond Peter sighed, ‘Well Praveen, an avalanche has been reported close to Mount Everest. Have you heard from Sekhar? Any news at all? How are they?’</p>
<p>Praveen’s heart skipped a beat. He called Sekhar Babu immediately. </p>
	<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
<p>Sekhar Babu came into Poorna’s tent. Poorna and Anand were chatting with each other. He announced, ‘There was an avalanche. Sixteen <em>sherpas</em> are missing.’</p>
<p>‘Avalanche?!!’</p>
<p>Anand said, ‘We may find them, Sir.’</p>
<p>At the onset of the mountaineering season, a team of authorized <em>sherpas</em> are sent to officially open the route to Everest. This time too, the group left the Base Camp, little knowing that a disaster awaited them. They got caught in an avalanche. They got caught in an avalanche at South Col, a sharp edged Col between Lhotse and Mount Everest. A Col is the lowest point of a ridge between two peaks, which provides a pathway from one side of the mountain range to another. Chances of survival, as is known, are usually zero. </p>
<p>Poorna broke the silence. ‘The avalanche has occurred in the southern route, isn’t it Sir?’</p>
<p>‘Yes. Thank God. We didn’t take that route!’</p>
<p>‘Why didn’t we, Sir? Did God appear in your dreams and advise you?’ </p>
<p>‘<em>Kaadu raa</em>..(No buddy). You guys did not get permission from the Nepal government for the south route. I am familiar with this route. I am better equipped to handle the challenges that you may face on this route. And your training is also based on the requirements of climbing this route. <em>Arthamainda? (Do you understand?)’ </em></p>
<p>Poorna and Anand remained silent.</p>
<p>Sekhar Babu’s phone rang. </p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
