<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-011">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Gearing Up for the Rendezvous</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">‘H</span>i, Sekhar! How are you guys?’ Praveen Kumar was on the line.</p>
		<p>‘Hello, Sir. We are doing very well.’</p>
		<p>‘How are Poorna and Anand?’</p>
		<p>‘They are good too, Sir. They are here with me right now.’</p>
		<p>‘I heard about the avalanche at South Col.’</p>
		<p>‘Well, yes. Unfortunate.’</p>
		<p>‘Would the avalanche affect your journey in any way?’</p>
		<p>‘Not really, Sir. But we may have difficulty finding <em>sherpas</em>. Sixteen <em>sherpas</em> are missing. After the incident, the <em>sherpa</em> community is fighting with the government for a larger share in income.’</p>
		<p>‘Can you turn on the speaker? I want to talk to Poorna and Anand.’</p>
		<p>‘Sure, Sir.’ Sekhar Babu turned on the speaker of his phone.</p>
		<p>‘Hello Poorna, Anand. How are you guys doing?’</p>
		<p>‘We are fine, Sir. How are you?’</p>
		<p>‘I am good. You would have heard about the avalanche, right?’</p>
		<p>‘Yes, Sir.’</p>
		<p>‘So, what do you want to do? Do you still want to go ahead? Or do you think you want to come back?’ </p>
		<p>‘Sir?!!!!’</p>
		<p>‘Poorna. Listen to me. It’s okay to come back. Making it to the Everest Base Camp itself is a summit for us. Your safety is more important to me. So, what I…’</p>
		<p>‘Sir,’ Poorna interrupted. ‘I want us to go. We have come this far. I am sure we can make it till Mount Everest too.’</p>
		<p>‘Poorna…’</p>
		<p>‘Sir, we are Swaeroes. We have no reverse gears. That is our tenth commandment…remember?’</p>
		<p>Anand chipped in. ‘Sir, we are not coming back. We have embarked on this journey. And we will go the whole way. The sky is the limit.’</p>
		<p><strong>19 April 2014</strong></p>
		<p>In a few days, Sekhar organized a team of <em>sherpas</em> for the expedition. Ngima Nuru and Gyansto <em>sherpa</em> would assist Poorna, and Mingma Nuru, and Mingma <em>sherpa</em> would assist Anand. Usually, one climber needs one <em>sherpa</em>. Since Poorna and Anand are children, Sekhar took extra precaution and appointed two <em>sherpas</em> for each of them. </p>
		<p><em>Sherpas</em> assist and guide mountaineers to the top of Mount Everest. They are born and live in the Himalayas, and above an altitude of 14,000 feet. The pregnant women of the community are taken to the monasteries on the peak of the Himalayan Mountains. The babies born in the monasteries naturally acquire the ability to acclimatize themselves to the climatic conditions of the Himalayas. They are able to generate oxygen as demanded by the body at that altitude. Other populations, especially those that live in extremely hot climatic conditions do not have the same body constitutions. </p>
		<p>The genetic composition and the natural acclimatization by birth to the extreme climate make <em>sherpas</em> agile on the mountains. Most of the local people turn into professional <em>sherpas</em> for livelihood. <em>Sherpas</em> play a very important role in mountaineering. It is almost impossible for first timers to scale the Everest without the help of <em>sherpas</em>. <em>Sherpas</em> not only act as guides but also work as porters and cooks during the expedition. Thus, most <em>sherpas </em>summit the Everest multiple times. For Poorna’s <em>sherpa</em> Mingma Nuru, this would be the seventeenth time to summit the Everest!</p>
		<p>The team now comprised 16 members: Poorna, Anand and their four <em>sherpas</em>; Surabhi and Kishore and their two <em>sherpas</em>; and four cooks, the doctor and Sekar Babu.</p>
		<p>The <em>sherpas</em> left to the higher camps with the luggage mounted on Yaks. Yaks native to the Himalayan ranges are a primary means of transportation on the mountains. They have a huge tolerance to cold climate. </p>
		<p><strong>20 April 2014 and 21 April 2014</strong></p>
		<p>Sekhar Babu took his team on a hike. The hill was rather steep and maintaining consistent breathing pattern itself turned into a big challenge. While descending the steep slope, Poorna and Anand used the body balancing technique they had learnt at Bhongir. </p>
		<p>The next day, Sekhar Babu took them to Quianjingou Lake, a frozen stream behind the Everest Base Camp for crampon practice. Although Poorna had practised with a crampon before, this time around, she experienced shortness of breath, yet managed to complete the exercise. </p>
		<p><strong>22 April 2014</strong></p>
		<p>The team was to commence the expedition drill for acclimatization the next day. They would climb to Advance Base Camp (ABC), then to Intermediary Camp and reach Camp 1. They would return to ABC via the same route. They would rest at each camp for two days. </p>
		<p>‘Why aren’t we going straight to Camp 2?’ asked Anand.</p>
		<p>‘Well, some trekkers return to ABC and go back to Camp 1 and then to Camp 2. But it is not advisable. Acclimatization is very essential,’ said Sekhar Babu. </p>
		<p>Hypoxia, pulmonary edema and cerebral edema are the major threats to the life of a mountaineer at these heights. Acclimatization is the key to prevent these symptoms. Precaution must be taken to prevent frost-bites and chill-burns. </p>
		<p><strong>23 April 2014 to 5 May 2014</strong></p>
		<p>Sekhar Babu’s contingent started their trek in the morning from Everest Base Camp and reached the Intermediate Camp located at 6,187 meters before noon. Although Poorna and Anand experienced slight dizziness and nausea, they managed this trek quite well.</p>
		<p><em>The challenge is yet to begin</em>, Poorna thought. </p>
		<p><em>One step at a time,</em> she kept telling herself. </p>
		<p>Numbing winds were pressing against them. Sheets of clouds floated below them. They were inching closer and closer to the Everest. Although amidst a spectacular 360-degree view, weariness was weighing down upon them heavily. </p>
		<p>The contingent now continued its ascent toward Advance Base Camp. The trek up this stretch became more labored. Poorna experienced dizziness. Anand developed cramps in both legs. After some time, Poorna started vomiting. Despite the vomiting, she remained active. But she was hardly able to eat after that. </p>
		<p>Poorna continued to be fussy about food at ABC too. She had now developed an aversion for <em>rotis</em> and meat cooked by the <em>sherpas</em>. She preferred eating regular pickle rice. At Everest Base Camp, she even had cool drinks during the noons. Sekhar Babu had been very patient with Poorna as far as her eating habits were concerned. He explained to her many times and finally resorted to scold her. She cried but couldn’t eat.</p>
		<p>Sekhar Babu requested Parmesh to speak to her over the phone. Parmesh sent her a voice message. Poorna had utmost respect for Parmesh, but she also feared him. She respected Sekhar Babu immensely. He was more cheerful and approachable. Poorna cried, forcing herself to eat even as she listened to Parmesh’s message. She wondered if there was an alternative to eating! That could have made her life so easy.</p>
		<p>Poorna’s fussiness, her vomiting episodes and further aversion to food were proving to be a problem. Anand was not doing very well, either. Shekar Babu decided to put them on oxygen for an hour. After an hour, they felt much better. Anand moved around comfortably. Poorna seemed all right for the first five minutes but started throwing up again. </p>
		<p>Sekhar Babu realized he had to take a call.</p>
		<p>He called Ngima Nuru <em>sherpa</em>, who was resting in his tent and said, ‘Please take her back to Everest Base Camp and bring her back after two days. We will wait for her here. If she doesn’t improve after you bring her back, we will have to send her back to the Everest Base Camp.’ </p>
		<p>Poorna was disappointed. She didn’t like the idea of returning to ABC. Not going to the Everest because of vomiting! She found it ridiculous. She felt well inside, despite the bouts of vomiting. But, Sekhar Babu was very concerned, and he didn’t want to take chances.</p>
		<p>‘Poorna, you get to eat only packaged food once you are above Camp 1. How will you manage if you cannot eat this cooked food itself? You will have to go back to Everest Base Camp and come back again. Let’s see if that works. Otherwise, ...’ he frowned and shrugged his shoulders.</p>
		<p>Poorna left for Everest Base Camp with a <em>sherpa</em>. She realized how precarious the path to the Everest was and how uncertain her chances of returning were. Tears rolled down her cheeks as she descended. </p>
		<p><em>I want to summit. I will come back. For sure</em>. <em>After all that training and hard work! Mind over Body. Yes! Yes! Yes!</em></p>
		<p>There are some situations in life when one has to rely heavily on inner strength. This was one such for Poorna. Despite the physical fitness, the long hours of training, all she needed now was that deep resource within her that is almost divine! That cannot be enhanced externally or measured by any yardstick. This strength, the divine life force itself, is harnessed at those moments when the lines differentiating life and death become narrow.</p>
		<p>Poorna remembered a transformative experience from Tadwai. Poorna was once a timid, fearful, withdrawn child. When she joined the Social Welfare Residential School at Tadwai, she was too shy to make friends. After school hours, the children had to engage in some outdoor sport. While the other girls ran, laughed and played, Poorna would find a quiet corner, away from the sight of the others. As time passed, she became friendlier, and she played hesitantly with the other girls. She desisted from participating in team sports such as volleyball and throwball simply because she was scared of the older girls, and she feared being beaten by them in a game. Her entry into serious sports was when one of her friends gave her name for the volleyball team without her knowledge. Neither could she withdraw nor would her friends let her escape. Just before she entered the court, she knew the moment of change had come. She could no longer cower and hide. Once she stepped onto the court, she forgot all her fears. She went all out and played. Her performance stunned her friends, seniors and teachers alike. There was no looking back. She went on to become the sports champion for the year.</p>
		<p>She found herself in a similar situation now. The stakes, however, were very, very high. Did she have the inner strength to quell mountain sickness?</p>
		<p>Meanwhile, Anand and Sekhar Babu trekked from ABC to Camp 1 and returned to Advance Base Camp. They now only waited for Poorna. Poorna was back in form after three days and arrived at the Advance Base Camp from the Everest Base Camp. She successfully reached Camp 1 along with her <em>sherpa.</em> After a night halt at Camp 1, she returned to Advance Base Camp.</p>
		<p>That night at dinner, Sekhar Babu was relieved to see Poorna eat without a fuss. It was apparent that she didn’t like the food, but she managed to gulp it down. Energy is vital in these altitudes.</p>
		<p>The team reached the Everest Base Camp after the trial. Now they waited for the weather report for clearance to resume their trek. Surabhi had to leave the trek due to some technical difficulties. So now Poorna, Anand and Kishore were on this journey together. </p>
		<p><strong>6 May 2014 – 23 May 2014</strong></p>
		<p>The team waited at the Everest Base Camp for the weather Gods to turn cordial. Praveen Kumar called them almost every day. The children bonded well with the <em>sherpas</em>. Ngima <em>sherpa</em> even played with the children . </p>
		<p>On 10th May 2014, the team met Ralf Dujmovits, a German mountaineer, who had summited 14 peaks. Anand and Poorna worshipped him, he was their idol. The 14 peaks he summitted were DEATH ZONES. Although they did not understand much of what he said in his heavily accented English, meeting him made a huge impact on the young minds. </p>
		<p>The weather was still not conducive. They visited a temple. They were offered holy water, which was clear, cold and very tasty. From the temple, they walked to a monastery. The monastery showcased long black swords and tall black statues. The walls of the cave adjoining the monastery had imprints of Buddha’s feet and hands. </p>
		<p>The monastery did have a few inhabitants. Some men and even small children. They were dressed in red robes and held rosary bead strings. They offered bread to Anand and Poorna. They sat and ate it along with the little children. Their faces were beatific with twinkling eyes and mischievous smiles. </p>
		<p>They explored further into the cave to find a big golden statue of about 12 feet high. Poorna and Anand wondered about the antiquity of the statue. They drank the milk tea that was offered. They did not like the taste, though. </p>
		<p>Policemen were stationed outside the temple and cave. Poorna found it amusing that these short stout men commuted in large four-wheeler vehicles. </p>
		<p><strong>17 May 2014</strong></p>
		<p>The weather seemed pleasant today. About nine teams, totaling 60 people, were stationed at the Advance Base Camp waiting for favourable weather. </p>
		<p>When Praveen called to talk to the children that morning, he suggested that it was a good idea to hoist a flag of the Telangana State, which was just formed, although not yet bifurcated. </p>
		<p>But how? Poorna and Anand were at a loss. They had carried only three flags: Party flags of S.P. Sankaran and Ambedkar and the Swaeroes’ flag. Anand and Poorna rummaged through their clothes for a pink shirt. Pink was the colour of Telangana’s revolution. Poorna did find a brand new plain pink T-shirt. Anand painted TELANGANA in his beautiful handwriting with grey fabric paint. When Sekhar Babu arrived, he found both the children painting the T-shirt. </p>
		<p><strong>18 May 2014</strong></p>
		<p>Sekhar Babu broke the good news to the children. The weather report was favourable for ascent until 25th May, 2014. The team would start their final trek up the Everest early next morning. Sekhar Babu called Praveen Kumar and informed him.</p>
		<p>‘Summit before 11.00 am 25th May. That’s our target,’ Shekar Babu said. </p>
		<p>The ABC is enveloped in an atmosphere of excitement. A new sense of energy is radiating among the 60 odd mountaineers. The Seven Summits Club hosted a party that night, complete with DJ and plenty of food. The Seven Summits Club is an alpine club for those aspiring to climb the seven highest peaks from across the seven continents of the world. There was a lot of merriment. Poorna enjoyed the music and dance. Poorna met mountaineers from all over the world. They were in awe of the Himalayas. She learnt that the ultimate desire of mountaineers from all over the world, who have summited several ranges such as the Alps, is to summit the Himalayas.</p>
		<p>Anand, Sekhar Babu and Poorna danced to Bollywood music. She stepped aside for a sip of water when a group of foreigners approached her. They had crossed each other’s path quite often at the camp. They had learnt that she was starting her expedition the next morning.</p>
		<p>One of them said, ‘So you are going to summit Mount Everest?’</p>
		<p>‘Yes,’ Poorna smiled.</p>
		<p>At the Everest Base Camp Dr. Narendra Patil had tutored them enough to understand and express in English. </p>
		<p>‘Oh, that is awesome! I am very proud of you. You have come this far. You can definitely go up there!’</p>
		<p>Poorna was thrilled. </p>
		<p>‘All the best and bye.’</p>
		<p>He walked away.</p>
		<p>‘Hey you, Poorna,’ he turned around and called. </p>
		<p>‘Don’t forget me once you summit. I am the first one to congratulate you for summiting,’ he blew a kiss in the air.</p>
		<p>Sekhar and Poorna laughed. Poorna waved back at him.</p>
		<p>‘So, big lady, we are starting tomorrow. Be good. Eat well for heaven’s sake. No throwing up. You know how tough and tricky the climb becomes from ABC. I will have to send you back like last time. Don’t let that happen. You will not get another opportunity,’ Sekhar Babu said.</p>
		<p>Poorna giggled.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
