<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-0012">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Inching Toward the Dream</h1>
		<p><strong>19 May 2014<br />7.00 am<br />Everest Base Camp</strong></p>
		<p><span class="big-letter">P</span>oorna checked her rucksack one more time; lest she had forgotten something – flags, spare gloves, socks, fleece jacket, Gortex (windproof jacket), tissue, chocolates, dry fruits and sanitary pads – everything was there. She had had her menstrual period just before reaching the Base Camp. During fitness assessment, the need to use medication to delay her periods until after the expedition was discussed. However, her consulting gynecologist, Dr. Lakshmi, was not in favour of meddling with her health unnecessarily. </p>
		<p>‘Nature has to take its own course. Besides, Poorna hardly experiences discomfort during her menstrual cycles. I think she can manage,’ Dr. Lakshmi had said.</p>
		<p>‘All set?’ Sekhar Babu called out to Poorna and Anand from outside the tents. </p>
		<p>The trio reached the <em>Stupa</em>, (a dome-like structure with a spire, built on a brick base) where the <em>puja </em>was to be performed before their departure. Poorna and her team had attended Lama <em>pujas </em>earlier too. But today, it was Poorna’s <em>puja; </em>she was to offer her worship to the <em>Sagarmaatha</em> seeking her blessings, and beseeching her to remain tranquil and not turn ferocious during her expedition.</p>
		<p>Rice and beer were offered to the <em>Dalai Lama (whose picture is worshipped)</em>, while a <em>lama</em> chanted prayers. The <em>sherpas</em> joined him in the chanting. The heavy smoke of incense sticks coiled and rose up to the skies. The holy flags atop the <em>stupa</em> fluttered. Birds flocked around the offerings to partake of it. </p>
		<p>The <em>lama,</em> who was chanting pointed to a bird that sat atop the <em>stupa</em> and said something.</p>
		<p>One of the <em>sherpa’s </em>explained that the bird, a Himalayan Cluff perching atop the <em>Stupa</em> during <em>puja</em> was a good omen. </p>
		<p>After the <em>puja</em>, the team headed back to their tents to fetch their rucksacks.</p>
		<p>Sekhar Babu sat on the floor outside the tent and said, ‘Let’s meditate to prepare ourselves for the challenges ahead.’ </p>
		<p>Poorna and Anand joined him.</p>
		<p>Poorna closed her eyes. She had been trained in the technique of visualization. She visualized Mount Everest. She visualized the peak. She summited. She stood there at the peak. The cold winds caressed her face. The holy flags fluttered behind her. She came back to meet her parents. She came back as a message to her Swaeroes. </p>
		<p>She stayed in that state of tranquility for some time.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>The mighty Everest loomed enormously on all sides. Since the weather forecast was favourable, numerous mountaineers were proceeding to the Everest peak. She acclimatized her sensibility to the environment. She allowed her senses to absorb as much of the atmosphere as possible. She took step after step. And with each step, her focus grew narrower and narrower. Finally, her mind shut out every thought. Her focus now was only on the next step. To take as many steps as possible from one mindful moment to another mindful moment. They reached the Intermediate Camp in seven hours. They were solemnly aware that the challenge would begin from this junction onwards. </p>
		<p><strong>20 May 2014</strong></p>
		<p>They began their journey from Intermediate Camp to the Advance Base Camp. They rested at the Advance Base Camp. Poorna was a little restless. She couldn’t fall asleep easily, despite being exhausted. She stepped out of her tent in the freezing cold. The chill winds howled under the enormous expanse of the star-lit sky. Devoid of the thick layers of pollution and other sources of light, the sky looked magnificent. Poorna had never seen so many stars at once. She identified the Little Bear constellation! She remembered lying down with her father on the <em>navvar</em> bed outside their hut gazing at stars on hot summer nights. </p>
		<p>He pointed to the North Star and said, ‘You must always be as steady and constant as the North Star.’</p>
		<p>‘What does that mean, <em>Baa</em>? To be constant, to be steady?’</p>
		<p>‘The star is fixed. It doesn’t move. In olden day, sailors took help of the Pole Star to navigate in the sea. Just like the North Star, once you set your mind on a goal, you must not waver. You must remain constant. Only then can you achieve what you set out for.’</p>
		<p>She gazed at the star for a few minutes. </p>
		<p>She remembered Sekhar Babu’s words as he oriented them after the Darjeeling trip:</p>
		<p>‘Guys, Praveen Sir is doing something really good for you. This is a great opportunity. If you want to better your lives, and if you want your children to live better than you do, put in all your efforts.’ </p>
		<p>She folded her hands in prayer. </p>
		<p>She bowed down in reverence to her parents. She submitted herself to Sagarmatha. Praveen Kumar’s goal was her sole purpose.</p>
		<p><strong>22 May 2014</strong></p>
		<p>The next destination was Camp 1. Henceforth, Poorna and Anand would be on their own with the <em>sherpas</em>. Sekhar Babu would not accompany them any further. He is not permitted to.</p>
		<p>Just before starting the expedition, Sekhar Babu advised everyone to use the washroom. This is perhaps the last toilet-like facility they would use in a long time. The morning breakfast was also the last freshly-cooked meal they would eat in a while.</p>
		<p>Poorna thought: <em>I will miss this luxury.</em></p>
		<p>Using tissues instead of water, eating packaged <em>rotis</em>, and of course the extreme temperature – these were the primary challenges for Poorna and Anand during the expedition. Attending to nature’s calls during the Everest Expedition is not an easy task. Some prefer pee bottles but Poorna managed to attend to them outdoors. Once on the final expedition, the frequency of nature calls reduce due to a decreased rate of metabolism and excessive sweating.</p>
		<p>Sekhar Babu held the children’s hands. He looked into their eyes for a few moments and wished them luck. </p>
		<p>‘Give it your best shot. If things go bad, just come back. We want you to achieve your goal. We have tried our very best. If at any point, you feel you cannot go on, just let go and come back.’ </p>
		<p>He embraced them. </p>
		<p>‘Everest will always be there <em>baba. </em>This year, next year and the year after. You being with us is more important.’ </p>
		<p>Poorna listened quietly. Anand chuckled.</p>
		<p>‘You are our heroes,’ Sekhar Babu said. ‘Now go, rock it.’</p>
		<p>The trek from Advance Base Camp to Camp 1 was steep; so steep that it had earned the sobriquet of ‘wall’. </p>
		<p>After half an hour, they reached the Rangbok Glacier. The <em>sherpas </em>directed the children to wear their crampons and harness seats. Crampons were not new for them. They had used them while learning Ice Craft and Snow Craft during the Darjeeling expedition. They had practiced walking with crampons on the frozen river at Base Camp. They were wearing most of the gear and using most of the equipment they had carried. They had worn the helmet for a long time now, and they had begun to use the ice hand axe. </p>
		<p>They trekked for half an hour with the help of snow axes and reached the Jumaring point. (Jumar is an ascend device used to climb heights). The word ‘Jumaring’ comes from Jumar. The second climber uses a rope and a ‘Jumar’, (otherwise called ‘Ascender’) to climb up. From this point onwards, the trek was vertical. </p>
		<p>After about an hour of climbing, Anand complained of leg pain. Poorna began to throw up. Although she was energetic and lively, the <em>sherpas</em> were concerned. Usually, oxygen is administered after reaching Camp 1, at an altitude of 7,100 meters. However, to avoid Acute Mountain Sickness (AMS), Poorna was administered oxygen at 6,700 meters. Poorna soon regained her agility and resumed the ascent with greater confidence. The <em>sherpas</em> advised her to wear the oxygen mask even while sleeping.</p>
		<p>The snowy terrain posed a challenge in itself. The snowy terrain was often interrupted by rocky terrain. Crampons, of course, were meant for trekking in snow. Trekking on rocky surfaces with Crampons was a difficult task. The children didn’t have the liberty to remove crampons as and when necessary. </p>
		<p><strong>23 May 2014<br />Camp 1</strong></p>
		<p>Anand woke up to find that his sleeping bag was stuck to the mat below. The mat was placed above the tent layer on the floor. The sleeping bag was placed above the mat. This had happened once at Advance Base Camp too. Poorna yanked off the mat from the tent layer as Anand held up the sleeping bag. They then brushed off all the snow that was stuck to the mat.</p>
		<p>Large amounts of snow had collected on the roof of their tents. They helped each other to lift the tent roof from inside so that the snow would slide down the walls. </p>
		<p>They drank liquids and started their ascent. Water is very essential to beat AMS. Water increases the efficiency of Red Blood Cells to absorb oxygen while breathing. Else, dehydration leads to fatigue, nausea and headaches. </p>
		<p><strong>24 May 2014<br />Camp 2</strong></p>
		<p>Camp 2 is at a height of 7,500 meters. The path from Camp 1 to Camp 2 requires a brief use of the ladder. The ascent gradually turned so steep that they had to use ropes for climbing. All the other camps were visible from Camp 2. </p>
		<p>Early in the morning, the team began its journey from Camp 2. Although the weather was not hostile enough to stall their progress, they had to brave extremely strong winds sweeping the mountain terrains at 70-150 km per hour. Ngima Nuru <em> sherpa</em> kept a close watch on Poorna. </p>
		<p>Poorna and Anand had barely spoken to each other for several days now. As they tread higher and higher, the body’s capacity to inhale sufficient oxygen began to reduce. Any attempt to speak, after removing the oxygen mask, at best sounded like feeble gasps. Besides, each of them climbed at their own pace, along with their <em>sherpas</em>, resting as and when necessary. </p>
		<p>The trek path was rather narrow from this point onwards. At times, there was space enough for only one person to walk and at others, three people could walk. </p>
		<p>Anand was trudging behind Poorna on the extremely narrow stretch. He was feeling quite exhausted. Narrow and limited spaces disturbed him. He bore a grudge against such spaces. He remembered <em>that</em> night. He woke up to the loud roar of thunder to find his parents sitting in a corner of the house drenched by the heavy water that leaked through the roof, leaving the only small dry portion of the house to him and his brother. Anand felt angry and helpless. That moment, he resolved to do whatever it takes to change the circumstances of his life, so, his parents could live with dignity. Summiting the Everest is perhaps the first step toward bettering his family’s circumstances; it is perhaps one way of conquering space, the physical space of shelter denied to his family. If he could summit the Everest, then no task was insurmountable. This achievement itself would change his life for the better. He kept pushing himself on the ridge until his legs collapsed.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>Anand opened his eyes. He was lying sprawled on the snow-covered ground. He saw a tall man bending over him – probably a Russian, waiting for him to get up and clear the way. It dawned on him that he had fainted. Fortunately, he had fallen forward on the path. Had he fallen off to his right, he would have landed in the base of a deep gorge. Anand hoped the Russian climber would give him a helping hand. But he stood there indifferent. Anand managed to prop himself up. He shot an angry glance at the foreigner and began to walk. </p>
		<p>He felt thirsty and tried to open his water bottle. He couldn’t. He removed his heavy-duty glove on his right hand beneath which, were another two layers of gloves. But he didn’t have to remove them. He opened the bottle, drank water, closed the lid and put it back in his bag. He tried wearing his gloves again. But they wouldn’t fit. He tried again. He couldn’t insert his fingers into the gloves. Anand suspected frostbite. He panicked, and his eyes welled up. Tears trickled down but halfway down his cheeks they froze into ice. Crying would only make things worse. He knew that. He would then have to remove his oxygen mask. His breath would leave vapour on the goggles, the vapour would turn into ice, and that would affect his visibility. He would then have to remove his goggles too.</p>
		<p>He laughed to himself. Why blame the Russian climber for not helping, when taking care of oneself is the only challenge on the path to Everest? </p>
		<p><em>You are in the Himalayas! Keep moving, just keep moving…. </em></p>
		<p><strong>24 May 2014 <br />3.00 pm<br />Camp 3</strong></p>
		<p>The team reached Camp 3. The terrain hereafter was very rocky and excessively exposed to the weather. Since the winds were strong enough to blow off the tents, the <em>sherpas</em> pitched their tents for the night between high rocks. </p>
		<p>Anand’s <em>sherpa</em> lit the butane gas stove. He poured some ice into a vessel and placed it on the stove. The ice liquefied and began to boil. He then dipped the packaged food into boiling water. Once the food was heated, they consumed it directly from the packet. Anand and Poorna had opted for flavored rice, such as jeera rice and tomato rice.</p>
		<p>Sekhar Babu called over the satellite phone around 5 pm, when Poorna and Anand were resting in their tents. ‘I just received the weather report. I think you should start tonight. Prepare yourselves for a night trek. You will start by 9 pm. Rest until then. And eat well. Poorna, especially you! Make sure you eat enough.’</p>
		<p>This came as a surprise to the children who had assumed that they would rest that night. Anand was especially looking forward to the rest as he was feeling exhausted.</p>
		<p>‘Sir, <em>ippudaa</em>…(Now?) I cannot Sir…I am too tired.’</p>
		<p>Poorna, however, was all geared up. She was prepared for every hardship. Climbing this far, she had learnt that nothing was impossible. </p>
		<p>Night trek is recommended in the DEATH ZONE for various reasons. It takes around eight to nine hours to reach the summit from Camp 3, at an altitude of 8,300 metres. The snow turns into solid, compact ice, at night making it easy to walk over it. However, with the rising day temperature, the snow melts and the surface becomes soft. Besides, a night trek saves the oxygen consumed during sleep and extends it for another eight hours in the DEATH ZONE, where one can barely survive without oxygen. Climbers spend minimum time in the DEATH ZONE to minimize chances of mishaps. Since a night trek ensures that a climber summits in the early hours of the morning, the climber has enough time to reach the safe zone before the end of day and it is easy to descend on snow than on ice and daylight is a big advantage.</p>
		<p>The children were about to enter the DEATH ZONE – the distance between Camp 3 and the Summit of the Everest. There are only fourteen DEATH ZONES in the whole world. Chances of survival are minimal in this extreme climate as the layer of oxygen is very thin. A simple misstep or dysfunction of the oxygen tank can be fatal. Many a time, deaths occur after summiting and while descending, only because the oxygen in the cylinder is completely spent.</p>
		<p>The <em>sherpas</em> place a few cylinders above Camp 3 as well for the return journey. </p>
		<p>Sekhar Babu called Praveen Kumar just before the children were to enter the DEATH ZONE. </p>
		<p>‘Sir, hereafter, I will have no communication with Poorna and Anand. They are heading into the DEATH ZONE. If everything goes well, they will summit by the early hours of tomorrow. I will call you in the morning.’</p>
		<p><strong>24 May 2014 <br />9.30 pm</strong></p>
		<p>Poorna secured a headlamp to her helmet. Her companions <em>sherpa </em>Ngima Nuru and Gyansto guided the way. The night was quiet. The ice peaks nose above them occasionally. The only sound was the gasp of inhaling and exhaling. With every breath Poorna strengthened her will to succeed and survive. </p>
		<p>Poorna chanted, <em>‘Jai Hanuman’</em> and rendered the Ten Commandments, alternately.</p>
		<p><em>One step at a time. One step up. One step higher. One step closer to the Summit.</em></p>
		<p><em>One step for adventure. One step for endurance.</em></p>
		<p><em>One step for confidence. </em></p>
		<p><em>One step toward liberation. </em></p>
		<p>Poorna kept moving. </p>
		<p>The path from Camp 3 to Mount Everest is divided into three steps. Each step has a different gradient and topography. To reach the first step, they had to use the rope. A steep rock covered in snow stood intimidating in front of her. This was once again a vertical ascent. </p>
		<p>That night for the first time, Poorna understood the importance of the rigorous training they had undergone for so many months. She saluted Sekhar Babu and Parmesh in her mind. </p>
		<p>The blustery wind made strange noises as it gushed forward and found its way between the undulating peaks. Although well secured with ropes, the force of the wind was strong enough to hurl a climber to the other end of the peak. If he is not firmly grounded, he can end up anywhere between glaciers and crevices. Poorna squatted for a couple of minutes to rest but held on tightly to the rope, firmly thrusting her legs against the peak to prevent the winds from sweeping her away. She started her ascent once again. </p>
		<p>She remembered her father, who used to ride his bycycle to Kondapur every day, almost 10 kilometers away. The terrain was rocky and hilly. Devidas had to cross a few hillocks to reach Kondapur. The road was not tarred, and the ride was bumpy and back breaking. How did he manage? She wondered. </p>
		<p><em>It’s his genes that I have inherited, after all. And, of course, the training, practice, nutrition and determination. </em></p>
		<p>As she climbed higher and higher, she began to feel a little dizzy. She had experienced dizziness in Ladakh too. A sudden increase in height makes her dizzy. She didn’t tell the <em>sherpas</em>, lest they ask her to return. She continued despite the mild dizziness. The only thought that enveloped her mind was to take the next step. She was not willing to stop at any cost.</p>
		<p>The dizziness increased, and her head started to spin. She couldn’t push herself any further. Dark spots and flashes floated before her eyes. She was barely able to see anything. Finally, she said, ‘Let us sit for a while, I am a bit tired.’ </p>
		<p>Where was the place to sit and rest? They were crossing a ridge, and the path was so narrow they could barely walk. </p>
		<p>‘Five more minutes,’ Gyansto <em>sherpa</em> said. </p>
		<p>She managed to walk, dragging her feet and praying for strength. They reached a place where there was space enough to sit down. Poorna sat down, exhausted. The <em>sherpa</em> checked her oxygen cylinder. To his shock, it was completely empty! He changed the oxygen tank. Instantly, Poorna felt better. He wondered how she had walked this long without oxygen. What if she had passed out on her way!</p>
		<p>Oxygen depletion is a major reason for death on Mount Everest. </p>
		<p>Poorna stretched her body and arched her back. The dark blanket above with randomly sprinkled dense glitter was mesmerizing. She remembered Praveen Kumar saying, ‘Reach out to the stars…’ She said that aloud and raised one hand as if to pluck one of them. They seemed so near. </p>
		<p><em>What if these stars are flowers and the Mount Everest, a tree! </em>She wondered.</p>
		<p>After a few minutes of rest, they continued their ascent. The second step was more challenging. She used the ladder to cross two deep crevices. Crossing a crevice, often thousands of feet deep, was indeed a dreadful experience even for experienced trekkers. Taking step after step on the rungs of the ladder with only a measly rope for support can be quite unnerving. A strong gust of wind can disturb the balance and lead to a fatal fall.</p>
		<p>The first crevice was 10 feet long. It was not easy crossing the crevice with crampons fastened to the shoes. The next crevice was about 10,000 feet deep. The ladder lay stretched for 30 feet at an angle of 60 degrees!</p>
		<p>She reached the third step, which was very easy compared to the first two. Yet, she couldn’t let her guard down for even a split-second. After the third step, there is a traverse, where climbers going up toward the north have to take a left turn, toward the Pyramid, which is just a few hundred meters from the Summit. The path is a roundabout the highest wall. The roundabout-ridge has a wall on one side and nothing on the other side. A misstep can take her to the unknown lands of the void. Like a lizard, she pressed herself against the wall taking small steps to cross the round-about ridge. </p>
		<p>Poorna reached the Summit Pyramid. She was just 500 meters away from the Summit point. </p>
		<p>‘How long?’ she kept asking her <em>sherpa</em> every two minutes. </p>
		<p>‘Almost there,’ he kept saying. </p>
		<p>She trudged uphill climbing rocks with thirty to seventy-degree gradient. Poorna began to chant, <em>‘Jai Hanuman!’</em> With each utterance, she harnessed her strength from deep within. She was just a few feet away from the Summit. </p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
