<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-013">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Humbled by the Himalayas</h1>
		<p><strong>24 May 2014</strong></p>
		<p><span class="big-letter">O</span>n the outskirts of Hyderabad the summer evening was still bright. Praveen Kumar was heading back to Hyderabad city after meetings at Piduguralla and Kandukuru. The roads were lined with pink flags. Although not officially declared, Telangana was soon going to be a separate State. The government and bureaucracy were making every effort to make the bifurcation of the State of Andhra Pradesh into Andhra Pradesh and Telangana as smooth as possible. The media was ablaze with news, reports, debates and discussions. In the midst of this political melee, news of the Himalayan Expedition of two Swaeroes has taken a back seat. Except for E TV 2, no other television channel covered the Expedition. </p>
		<p>Praveen had had many sleepless nights ever since the news of the avalanche that took a toll of several <em>sherpas</em>. He was tempted to abort the expedition and recall the children. However, calling them back out of fear would not only kill the aspirations of these two children but of so many other Swaeroes who were keenly following this expedition and awaiting the successful return of their icons. </p>
		<p>Praveen had been extremely restless ever since the children embarked on the last leg of their journey to the Summit. He knew that Poorna and Anand would have to summit before 11.00 am tomorrow for their safe return. </p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>That night, Praveen lay awake tossing and turning in his bed. His wife, Lakshmi Bai sat up reading late into the night. </p>
		<p>She looked up from her book, ‘Shouldn’t you get some sleep?’</p>
		<p>‘Well. I’m not able to. Why are you sitting up?’ </p>
		<p>‘I can’t seem to sleep either.’</p>
		<p>She resumed reading.</p>
		<p>After some time, she placed the book away and said, ‘I hope they come back safe.’ </p>
		<p>‘Of course, they will,’ he smiled at her. </p>
		<p>‘Heard from Sekhar yet?’</p>
		<p>‘Not until morning. They are now in the DEATH ZONE covering 8,400 meters.’</p>
		<p>‘The DEATH ZONE. My goodness!’ She took a deep breath. ‘Praveen, I have this feeling … it’s all going to go very well. You have wished the best for your society. This task <em>will</em> be accomplished,’ she said with conviction. ‘And you are a policeman, Praveen. Be brave.’</p>
		<p>Their eyes met. They were assuring each other and seeking assurance at the same time. </p>
		<p>He tried to sleep. </p>
		<p><em>What if the children don’t make it back? What if something happens to them? Will the idea of Swaeroes survive? Will the Ten Commandments be prov</em>en wrong?</p>
		<p>These thoughts were swirling in his head, relentlessly. He couldn’t shake his mind off them. He would barely sleep for half an hour, and he would wake up, his mouth dry. He would sip some water and try to calm his mind. He had never been this desperate to see the light of day. Each time he woke up, he looked at the time on his mobile and for a message or call from Sekhar Babu, knowing very well that he will not hear from him until dawn.</p>
		<p><strong>25 May 2014<br />5.45 am</strong></p>
		<p>Poorna had barely taken a few steps. She stopped suddenly with her eyes transfixed on the ground. It took her a couple of seconds to figure out that what lay half covered in snow was not a rock surface, but a body; the corpse of an ill-fated mountaineer. The body was dressed exactly like her: the same kind of mountaineering gear, oxygen tank, shoes and crampons. The now icy hand held an ice axe exactly like the one she held. A chill ran down her spine. Her legs shivered. This man or woman must have come here with dreams. But the mighty Himalayas had taken the climber’s breath away!</p>
		<p>She wondered how many bodies she had passed by until now. She must have even walked over a few!!</p>
		<p><em>Human life can be the most precious or the most worthless. The line is so thin! As thin as air!</em></p>
		<p>She would have ended up a mere worthless body buried somewhere, unknown, on the mighty Himalayas, had her <em>sherpa</em> not swapped her empty oxygen tank. </p>
		<p>Dawn was breaking. The veil of darkness was slipping even as the undulating snowcapped peaks began to emerge in a golden hue. </p>
		<p>Poorna stood still on the peak of Mount Everest. The camps and paths that she had crossed to reach there lay beneath her. The colourful triangular prayer flags strung together hung here and there; a few lines of flags, whose thread had snapped, lay on the ground. On the other side, the entire length of Mount Everest lay completely exposed. She felt like she was an eagle hovering above an eternal bed of clouds. </p>
		<p>The temperature on Everest was between -40 and -45°c. Chilly winds were slapping against her face. She stayed motionless for some time. The thumping of the heart was the only human experience she discerned at this moment. All else was elemental – the howling wind, the panorama of undulating snow-covered peaks, the sky above.</p>
		<p>The sun rose to full glory, bathing the enormous expanse of the mountains in a golden hue. This was indeed the most surreal experience she had ever had; and probably, she would ever have in this life time. She felt overwhelmed. Her soul thirsted to soak in as much as was possible. She felt that she had finally seen the Ultimate. The experience of God is what <em>you </em>choose to make out of it. This is her personal experience of God. It was her ultimate truth, and she had realized it. She closed her eyes and bowed her head. She felt humbled by the colossal beauty of nature. For a moment, time and space ceased to exist. She was one with time and space! One with everything and with nothing! All dualities merged. Ceased to exist.</p>
		<p>She sought to orient herself. Her tiny mind tried to encapsulate the enormity of the mountain, but in vain. All that was palpable to her were the moments she had spent since she left the Advance Base Camp and every step she had taken forward. This night that she had spent transcending the DEATH ZONE seemed like much, much longer than it had been.</p>
		<p>Poorna sat on a small rock on the Everest, having spent every ounce of energy. </p>
		<p>One of Poorna’s <em>sherpa, </em>removed a T-shirt from his rucksack and gave it to her. Poorna read the words printed right across the shirt: I AM THE YOUNGEST GIRL TO CLIMB MOUNT EVEREST. She flashed a big smile. Gyansto <em>sherpa </em>and Ngima <em>sherpa</em> gestured a thumbs-up and smiled broadly. She looked into their small eyes, deep set amidst folds of weathered skin – her sole companions, here on the Everest, to share her joy and pride. </p>
		<p>Gyansto helped her wear the shirt. He took a few pictures of her. The <em>sherpas</em> left her alone to savour those moments; moments of a life-time. She noticed the s <em>herpas</em> closing their eyes for a few moments.</p>
		<p><em>Seventeen ascents! </em>she thought. </p>
		<p>Poorna pulled out a few flags from her bag. She hoisted the Indian flag and then the Telangana State flag. Little did she know then that she would go down in history as the first to hoist the Telangana State flag, even before the official formation of the State and that too on the highest peak in the world! </p>
		<p>Poorna next hoisted flags bearing the pictures of S.R. Sankaran and B.R. Ambedkar. And finally, the Swaeroes flag. She was a very proud Swaeroe at that moment. She remembered Praveen Kumar with pride and respect. She saluted Sekhar Babu and Parmesh, her gurus. Her eyes moistened when her parents flashed in her mind. Can a child ever thank her parents enough??</p>
		<p>A few mountaineers from the Chinese Mountaineering Federation, who had arrived at the Summit after officially opening the route to Everest from China approached Poorna and said, ‘Congratulations! You are the first to set foot on Everest this year after the routes were opened.’ </p>
		<p>Those words went over Poorna’s head. She really could not comprehend the enormous import of the words as she stood against the expansive spread of earth’s curvature. She had just accomplished several firsts to her credit; she was the youngest girl in the world to summit the Everest ever; first to hoist the Telangana State Flag; and, first to summit that year. All at the tender age of thirteen!</p>
		<p>Another of them shook hands with her and said, ‘Aww, that’s a great grip! You have strong arms, young lady.’ </p>
		<p>Poorna’s <em>sherpa</em> indicated to Poorna that they should start descent. A mountaineer is not allowed to stay for more than 15 minutes at the peak. If the traffic picks up descent can become delayed and difficult.</p>
		<p>She picked up a small stone from the ground. She would treasure it forever. A memento of the most profound life experience! A trophy, she gave herself! She turned around and walked toward her <em>sherpa,</em> who was waiting patiently for her. </p>
		<p><strong>25 May 2014<br /> 7.00 am<br />Residence of Praveen Kumar, IPS</strong></p>
		<p>Praveen woke up with a start. He could hear his heart thumping in his ears. He had broken into a cold sweat. He felt he had committed a sin falling asleep that night! In fact, he had slept just before the break of dawn when the early birds had begun their symphony. In want of fresh air, he stepped out into the lawn of his residential quarters with a cup of steaming hot coffee. The phone rang in his pocket. </p>
		<p><em>Sekhar Babu!</em></p>
		<p>‘Hello.’</p>
		<p>‘Hello, Sir,’ Sekhar Babu said. </p>
		<p>Praveen sensed that Sekhar had turned the speaker mode on. He could hear the radio on full volume. He heard a lot of conversation in the Nepali language. </p>
		<p>Praveen became impatient. ‘Sekhar, just tell me. How are the children?’</p>
		<p>‘Sir, please listen to this.’ Sekhar again placed the phone close to the radio. </p>
		<p>Praveen was exasperated. ‘Why can’t you just tell me??!!’</p>
		<p>‘Congratulations, Sir,’ Sekhar said. ‘Poorna and Anand have summited. Poorna is now a world record holder. She is the youngest girl to scale Mount Everest. The children are on their way back.’</p>
		<p>Praveen went blank. The world around him froze for a while. He found himself a chair and collapsed in it. He barely moved for a few moments. Then he closed his eyes. What a relief! After a minute, he took the phone and typed out a message: </p>
		<p><em>Poorna and Anand have summited Mount Everest. Poorna has made a world record. She is the youngest girl to climb Mount Everest.</em></p>
		<p>He sent the message to Raymond Peter and Shamsher Singh Rawat. He sat back in his chair. </p>
		<p>He took a deep breath.</p>
		<p>Ever since the children got approval for the Himalayan Expedition, he was on tenterhooks. He had been plagued by guilt.</p>
		<p><em>Had he put their lives at stake to fulfill some idealism of his own? How would he live the rest of his life if something were to happen to the children? What would he tell their parents?</em></p>
		<p>He had endured an excruciating moral, ethical turmoil.</p>
		<p>He looked up. </p>
		<p>‘The sky is our limit, Swaeroes!’</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>The descent, in comparison to ascent, was very easy. But Poorna’s <em>sherpa</em>, Ngima Nuru was very careful. Complacence and negligence during descent have resulted in many a death. Besides the centre of gravity of the body shifts making descent difficult. </p>
		<p>She passed by five more corpses. </p>
		<p><em>Why do we end up seeing things we don’t want to? The more you resist, the more it persists. </em></p>
		<p>The traffic on this route increased as the Nepal routes were closed following the avalanche. </p>
		<p>Poorna met Anand on her way back. </p>
		<p>‘Do you want to go to the Summit again? Come on. Let’s do it together.’</p>
		<p>Poorna was too tired. </p>
		<p>She handed over all the flags to him. </p>
		<p>She thought she would warn him about the corpses. She decided not to. </p>
		<p>Anand summited around 6.45 am. </p>
		<p>He recorded his message to Praveen Kumar through Go-pro. </p>
		<p>‘Praveen Sir, we, your Swereaos, have done it. We have achieved this. <em> Jai Bheem</em>,’ he gasped for oxygen.</p>
		<p>Poorna called Praveen Kumar from the satellite phone even before she reached Camp 3. </p>
		<p>‘Sir, we did it. It was very tough, Sir. Very, very tough, but we succeeded.’ </p>
		<p>Praveen just listened. </p>
		<p>Neither of them could say more. </p>
		<p>Sekhar Babu informed Praveen Kumar that he would bring the children back to Advance Base Camp the same day since the weather forecast predicted snow fall with chances of an avalanche the next day. </p>
		<p>The descent to Advance Base Camp from Camp 1 was quite enjoyable. They slid down the ice effortlessly. But they had to be careful with the carabiner. Poorna ensured her carabiner was attached to the rope. She attached the rope to the other side of the Jumar. Now the ascender turns into a descender. She kept moving, attaching, detaching and reattaching her descender to the ropes that were fixed along the route. Her s <em>herpas</em>, confident of her skills let her descend independently and at her own pace. Snowfall obstructed her vision. She removed her goggles and forgot to wear them back in her eagerness to reach ABC. The snow hit directly into her eyes. The sharp ice particles hurt her eyes.</p>
		<p>They reached Advance Base Camp by evening. Poorna’s eyes had turned bloody red and burned as if set on fire. The doctor at ABC examined her and found her to be fit. He prescribed eye drops.</p>
		<p>She rested well that night. The redness in the eyes had decreased.</p>
		<p>The same evening, a snowstorm with strong winds hit the ABC area. Visibility was limited to just four feet. The whole atmosphere was enveloped in a blanket of thick white fog. The first thought on Poorna’s mind was the plight of those still at Camp 2 and 3. She prayed for their well-being. There was some anxiety in Camp 3 as three climbers were found missing. Fortunately, they reached ABC, after trudging along in knee-deep snow. </p>
		<p>Poorna got her periods. She remembered, ‘Mind over matter.’</p>
		<p>Just before retiring for the night, Sekhar Babu said, ‘Poorna, you now hold the world record for being the youngest girl to summit Mount Everest!’</p>
		<p>‘Ah!’ she gasped. ‘Yes. My <em>sherpa</em> told me.’</p>
		<p>‘Poorna, you are also the first climber to set foot on Mount Everest for this year.’</p>
		<p>Anand held Poorna by the shoulder affectionately.</p>
		<p>‘<em>Chinna</em>, there’s one more achievement to your credit. You hoisted the Telangana flag for the first time. And where!! ON Mount Everest!’ he beamed. </p>
		<p>‘You hoisted the Telangana Flag even before the State is officially formed,’ he laughed, ‘How do you like it?’</p>
		<p>‘<em>Arey yaar</em>, she is too young to understand all of this,’ said Sekhar Babu. </p>
		<p>‘You are so naïve Poorna. You don’t know that you have achieved an incredible feat! Your innocence and humility.....,’ said Sekhar Babu.</p>
		<p><em>Your innocence and humility Poorna, is what makes your achievement all the more priceless! </em></p>
		<p><strong>1 June 2014</strong></p>
		<p>Delhi was wilting under the sweltering summer heat. K. F. Reddy, the Senior Consultant of Social Welfare Schools flew to Kathmandu to receive Anand and Poorna. He trained the children to face interviews and handle press meets. Later, Sharma, the Academic Coordinator of Social Welfare Schools, also flew to Delhi to make arrangements and to help the children in their interaction with the media.</p>
		<p>The children took two days to transition from subzero temperatures to extreme heat. They stayed at Andhra Pradesh Bhavan in New Delhi. After four days, the children met Prime Minister Narendra Modi who congratulated them. He expressed his happiness on Poorna’s achievement as a realization of his <em>‘Beti bachaavo, beti Padaavo</em>’ (Save the girl child, Educate the girl child) campaign.</p>
		<p>The media at Andhra Pradesh Bhavan recorded bytes from the children regarding their success.</p>
		<p><strong>6 June 2014<br />Rajiv Gandhi International Airport, Hyderabad</strong></p>
		<p>Poorna, Anand and Sekhar Babu walked swiftly toward the private lounge of the airport. Poorna spotted her parents. A month ago, she wasn’t sure she would live to see them. She waved at them shyly.</p>
		<p>She ran up to them, held their hands and said, ‘ <em>Yadi</em>, Ba - I told you I would be back. Look, now I am back. For real.’</p>
		<p>Tears rolled down Lakshmi’s face. Anand’s mother Lakshmi too shed tears of happiness. It was only after all the media attention and appreciation and congratulations pouring in from all quarters of the country and abroad, that the parents actually began to understand the gravity of the adventure their children had undertaken and the enormity of the success they had achieved. </p>
		<p>Praveen Kumar stood with his arms folded. Without batting an eyelid, he watched the two Swaeroes walk up to him.</p>
		<p>‘Congratulations,’ he said. He held their hands in a tight warm clasp. He hugged them both. </p>
		<p>‘Congratulations,’ he said one more time. ‘You did it.’ You have made us proud.</p>
		<p>Poorna said, ‘Thank you.’ </p>
		<p>How could she tell him that she thought of him at every step up in the DEATH ZONE? That it was his faith in her that ran through her body as pulsating energy? That it was him that she thanked when she was at the top of the world?</p>
		<p>Poorna stepped out of the Airport lounge. She was overwhelmed when she saw her principal, teachers and friends who had assembled to greet her. </p>
		<p>Poorna’s eyes darted from face to face. She searched for a particular face in the crowd. Her eyes suddenly lit up. She ducked down and disappeared for a few seconds. She found her way through the crowd. like a rabbit scurrying through the bushes. She sprung up before Swapna, her PET teacher from Tadwai. </p>
		<p>‘Swapna Madam!!!’</p>
		<p>Swapna was taken aback. The next second, she smiled from ear to ear and hugged Poorna. Poorna hugged her right back. Tears rolled over Swapna’s face.</p>
		<p>Poorna whispered, ‘Thank you,’ in her ears, and headed toward Parmesh- the first two people who showed her that a path such as this existed.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>Poorna and Anand interacted with media persons. A rally was also organized from Shamshabad airport to Charminar. Thousands of students from all the Social Welfare Residential Schools and hundreds of alumni joined. Social activists, social workers, educationists, sports persons, journalists also joined the rally in celebration of an achievement which transcended the narrow confines of age, religion, caste and class. The rally continued for hours with people on bikes, in cars, jeeps and lorries joining in.</p>
		<p>‘Look at that, Poorna,’ Anand whispered pointing to the sea of people following them. </p>
		<p>‘You are a star, Poorna. You are an inspiration. You have created history.’</p>
		<p>For the first time, it sunk into Poorna that her achievement was indeed great! On the peak, she remembered having bowed down to the entire human race. And now once again she felt overwhelmed. Her achievement was a result of blessings from each one of them.</p>
		<p>Praveen observed Poorna from a distance. She was a lot more confident now. However, her eyes were still humble and unpretentious. She sure knew how to handle this sudden fame and attention. She has her head fixed firmly on her shoulders. </p>
		<p><em>POORNA.</em></p>
		<p><em>The Complete One.</em></p>
		<p>For Poorna and her ilk, the journey of the conquest of the real world has begun.</p>
		<p>THE END</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
