<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-014">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Beyond Everest</h1>
<p><span class="big-letter">P</span>oorna summited Mount Everest, the world’s highest peak (8,843 meters) on 25th May 2014. She set the world record of being the youngest girl (13 years and 11 months) in the world to summit Mount Everest.</p>
<p>Poorna did not stop with the Everest. She aimed for the seven summits across the seven continents in the world. She summited Kilimanjaro (5,895 meters) in Africa in 2016, Mount Elbrus (5,642 meters) in Europe in 2017, Carstensz Pyramid (4,884 meters) in Ocenia region in March 2019 and Aconcagua (6,961 meters) in South America in April 2019. Now, her aim is to conquer Denali (6,190 meters) in North America and Vinson Massif (4,892 meters) in Antarctica. </p>
<p>In the meanwhile, Anand scaled Kilimanjaro (5,895 meters) and Mount Kosciuszko (2,228 meters) in Australia. He is today a certified skiing coach from the Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute of Mountaineering and Allied Sports, Manali. He aspires to become an international trainer in mountaineering.</p>
<p><strong>Awards and Recognitions</strong></p>
<p>* Received the ‘Prime Minister’s Excellence Award’ in 2014 and ‘Amazing Indians’ award in 2015, from Sri Narendra Modi, the honorable Prime Minister of India. </p>
<p>* Received the ‘Presidential Excellence Award’ in 2017 from Sri Pranab Mukherjee, the honorable President of India. </p>
<p>* Represented Telangana state from India in the UN Sustainable Development Summit - 2015 held in New York. Poorna boarded a Metro for the first time in New York city.</p>
<p>* Met the Honorable Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao. He declared a grant of five acres of land in Indalwai, Nizamabad district and R 25 lakhs each to Poorna and Anand and a three-bedroom house in Kamareddy. The MLA of Nizamabad district awarded another 1 lakh rupees as a reward for her Everest summit. </p>
<p>* After her successful ascent of the Everest, Poorna’s name was printed on all the Indigo carrier luggage for a whole week in the entire country. All air hostesses of the carrier wore badges etched with the words, ‘I am Poorna.’ The aircraft was painted blue. Poorna’s name was painted on it.</p>
<p>* In 2017, Bollywood Actor-Director, Rahul Bose released a mainstream movie called ‘Poorna’. Poorna and Praveen Kumar watched the movie along with Pranab Mukharjee, the then President of India. </p>
<p>* Named a Paul Harris Fellow by the Rotary Foundation of Rotary International in appreciation of tangible and significant assistance given for the furtherance of better understanding and friendly relations among peoples of the world. </p>
<p>* Invited as Chief Guest for All India Police Sports Meet of the Border Security Force in 2016.</p>
<p>* Received the TiE-ASPIRE Young Achiever Award, 2014 from ASPIRE Grow More in appreciation of her unrivaled contribution as a role model to the youth of India. </p>
<p>* Won the Pogo Amazing Kids Award, 2014 from POGO channel. </p>
<p>* Awarded the Sakshi Excellence award from Sakshi TV Channel in 2015. </p>
<p>* Awarded the APSARA Award from Zee Telugu in 2018. </p>
<p>* Awarded one lakh rupees by TV 9 channel for her ‘enduring will’ to climb Mount Everest. </p>
<p>* Conferred the Vasundhara Award on Women’s Day in 2019 E TV channel. </p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
