<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-015">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Postscript</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">P</span>oorna’s family hardly comprehend the magnitude of Poorna’s achievements. They just wanted their daughter to come back home safe. A victory would be a bonus. Neither her parents nor her brother Naresh had any inkling of what Poorna had achieved and the dangers that were lurking along the path of her journey. </p>
		<p>When Poorna called home from Camp 3, her father received the call, and her mother was not even around. Devidas was only relieved to know that his daughter was on her way back after summiting. That afternoon, their neighbors rushed in to tell them that Poorna was on TV talking about her summit to Mount Everest. In an hour, the media swarmed her village. </p>
		<p>The villagers thought that the mountain may at the most be a little more higher than the <em>guttas</em> (hillocks), that they trekked as a routine. It was no big deal for them. </p>
		<p>However, after watching repeated telecasts of Poorna’s feat and after seeing visuals of the Everest, they, for the first time began to understand the concept of snow mountains and extreme climatic conditions. But even that did not fascinate the villagers for a long time. For them, Poorna was their Poorna, the girl who belonged to Pakala village, their village. </p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
