<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Poorna</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-016">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Rollout at the Social Welfare Residential Schools after Poorna’s Accomplishment</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">P</span>oorna’s achievement is indeed a testimony of the efforts to revamp the Social Welfare Department policies and principles. With the formation of the Telangana State and Poorna’s achievement, the Social Welfare Residential Schools came under the spotlight. In Telangana, 134 new institutions were added to the existing 134 institutions. The strength of the students in the academic year 2011–12 was 65, 525. By 2018–19 it increased to 1, 49, 680. </p>
		<p>Poorna’s success played a significant role in changing the perspectives of all the stakeholders of Social Welfare Schools, including teachers, parents, the government of Telangana and the society at large. The otherwise rigid and rudimentary system marched toward holistic learning without compromising the quality of education. </p>
		<p>Previously, providing basic amenities was a challenge. Today, 27 Center for Excellence colleges have been instituted to offer preparatory courses for children aspiring to join professional courses. A special defense training college for women, a Sainik school (to train children aspiring to join the National Defense Academy) and a school of fine arts have been established.</p>
		<p>Social Welfare Schools, which were sought only by the poorest strata of the society, are now competing with concept schools for admissions. Parents from the middle class are looking at Social Welfare Schools as a viable option for their children, because of the high standards of education and facilities, for a modest fee.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
