<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>Nagpur Ashram</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body>
<p>Our Earth</p>
<p>and</p>
<p>Our Quest for Energy</p>
<p>D. P. Sen Gupta</p>
<p>PRISM BOOKS PVT LTDBengaluru  Chennai  Hyderabad  Kochi  Kolkata</p>
<p>Our Earth</p>
<p>and</p>
<p>Our Quest for Energy</p>
<p>Dr. D. P. Sen Gupta</p>
<p>Published by : Prism Books Pvt. Ltd.</p>
<p># 1865, 32nd Cross, 10th Main, BSK IInd Stage</p>
<p>Bengaluru-560 070. Phone : 080-26714108</p>
<p>Telefax : 080-26713979, e-mail : info@prismbooks.com</p>
<p>
<em>Also at</em>
</p>
<p>Chennai : Tel : 044-24311244, e-mail : prismchennai@prismbooks.com</p>
<p>Hyderabad : Tel : 040-23261828, e-mail : prismhyderabad@prismbooks.com</p>
<p>Kochi : Tel : 0484-4000945, e-mail : prismkochi@prismbooks.com</p>
<p>Kolkata : Tel : 033-24297957, e-mail : prismkolkata@prismbooks.com</p>
<p>© Dr. D. P. Sen Gupta, 2013</p>
<p>Pages : 120</p>
<p>Price :  000</p>
<p>Printed on : 70 GSM Maplitho</p>
<p>Cover Design : D. P. Sen Gupta</p>
<p>No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording or any information storage and retrieval system, without premission in writing from the publisher.</p>
<p>ISBN :</p>
<p>Printed at : Aditya Printers, Bengaluru</p>
<p>
<em>"Akashbhara surjotara Viswabhara pran...."</em>
</p>
<p>
<em> My songs arise when I wonder how,</em>
<em/>
<em> in this vast universe studded with suns and stars,</em>
</p>
<p>
<em> and in this world full of life,</em>
</p>
<p>
<em> even I could have a place!</em>
</p>
<p>
<em> My songs arise when I wonder that</em>
</p>
<p>
<em> the waves from eternity that swing</em>
</p>
<p>
<em> the ebb and tide of this earth,</em>
</p>
<p>
<em> also throb in my veins!</em>
</p>
<p>
<em> My songs arise as I step on the grass</em>
</p>
<p>
<em> on my way to the woods,</em>
</p>
<p>
<em> startled by the fragrance of flowers,</em>
</p>
<p>
<em> feel overwhelmed to see all the gifts of joy spread around,</em>
</p>
<p>
<em> My songs arise when I stretch my ears,</em>
</p>
<p>
<em> look around with my eyes wide open,</em>
</p>
<p>
<em> pour out my heart on this earth,</em>
</p>
<p>
<em> and look for the Unknown in the known.</em>
</p>
<p>
<em>Rabindranath Tagore</em>
</p>
<p>(Translated by the author)</p>
<p>Introduction and Acknowledgement</p>
<p></p>
<p>Almost two years back, I began to write a series of weekly articles for young readers of the Deccan Herald, about the energy crisis that we are confronted with. After briefly describing the five major elements of nature <em>KSHITI </em><em>(earth), A</em><em>P</em><em>(water), </em><em>TEJ </em><em>(Energy), </em><em>MORUT</em><em>(wind), </em><em>BYOM</em><em>(sky), </em>as conceived in ancient India and other early civilizations, I moved on to human quest of energy, one of the five elements stated above. This book is based on the articles modified as necessary.</p>
<p>My main objective has been to make the young readers aware of the Energy problems that we have been facing now, the gross inequity of energy distribution and consumption and what we need to do in order to avoid a serious crisis in future, with particular emphasis on India’s problems. Some elementary concepts have been introduced for the uninitiated.</p>
<p>I remind myself as I tell the young readers that we are extremely fortunate to be born as humans on this privileged planet where everything has been right so that life could thrive. A visit to a cave reveals how the discovery of light changed the lives of the cavemen and how their creative instincts emerged and the modern man was born. Having briefly described the formation of fossil fuels where solar energy has been stored for millions of years, I go on to describe how, following the Industrial revolutions, we have been literally plundering this planet of ours during the last two centuries and are nearing a state of bankruptcy.</p>
<p>Some of the inventions, their principles and also the lives of the great inventors have been briefly described. From the early stage of using steam to relieve human drudgery one inevitably goes on to the second industrial revolution with the invention of current electricity, the life blood of modern age.</p>
<p>Our craze for speed and craving for comfort have led to new inventions, exacerbated the energy problem and worsened atmospheric pollution.</p>
<p>Towards the end, the use of uncontrolled nuclear power for bombs and controlled nuclear power for producing electricity have been touched upon. With apprehensions expressed about the safety of use of nuclear reactors based on fission and the uncertainty about fusion based nuclear power generation, even at a distant future, I focus on Alternative energy that is increasingly becoming viable.</p>
<p>Energy saving and conservation are also emphasized, described as sources of alternative energy.</p>
<p>Particular emphasis is laid on solar photovoltaic and wind energy with the reminder that despite the development of alternative energy the use of conventional, non-renewable energy production, such as coal based energy, will be indispensable for a fairly long time.</p>
<p>That a peaceful international ambience will bring about substantial energy saving and ensure human existence is brought home to our young readers.</p>
<p>In acknowledging my indebtedness to various people, let me first of all, mention Ms Sarjit Ramesh of Deccan Herald. But for her persuasion, I doubt if I would have ventured into this at all. I am grateful to Ms Parul Shah, Executive Director, The Printers ( Mysore ) Pvt.Ltd.…for readily giving me permission to publish the articles as a book. Thanks to Shri Pranesh Siravara of Prism Books Pvt Ltd., for undertaking this venture, to Professor V.S. Ramamurthy, Director National Institute of Advanced studies, Bangalore, for his encouragement, to my young colleague from Centre for Atmospheric Science, IISc, Bangalore, Dr Prosenjit Ghosh for his advice on a couple of chapters, friends Maire and Roger Gibson for going through a few chapters, to my friends and colleagues Professors Dilip Ahuja of NIAS, Arnab Rai Choudhuri of IISc, Bangalore, Professor Soumitra Sengupta of IACS, Calcutta for their comments on the manuscript. Those who made their perceptive comments on my cover design are Professor Indraneel Sen of IISc, Gautam and Anitha, my young colleagues at NIAS. Finally, I am indebted to my wife Nandita for her patience in having to listen to the same stories from me over and over again.</p>
<p>D. P. Sen Gupta</p>
<p>CONTENTS</p>
<p>1. Our earth and our quest for energy 1</p>
<p>2. What is energy ? 2</p>
<p>3. The sun, earth’s main source of energy 5</p>
<p>4. A celestial accident 8</p>
<p>5. A look inside the earth 10</p>
<p>6. Our earth is a huge magnet 13</p>
<p>7. The blue firmament that shields us 16</p>
<p>8. Water, water, everywhere 19</p>
<p>9. Wind power 22</p>
<p>10. The gentle giant 26</p>
<p>
<span> 11. A cave tells of darkness 29</span>
</p>
<p>12. The buried light 32</p>
<p>13. Steam engines and the industrial revolution 35</p>
<p>14. The eternal flame 38</p>
<p>15. End of oil 41</p>
<p>16. The oil-guzzlers....stories of their invention 45</p>
<p>17. Flying 49</p>
<p>18. Lightning and static charges 52</p>
<p>19. Current electricity 55</p>
<p>20. Current electricity and the scientific revolution it ushered in 58</p>
<p>21. Electricity and magnetism 61</p>
<p>22. The bookbinder who changed the world 64</p>
<p>23. One of the greatest inventors who sold candies 67</p>
<p>24. "Please do not disturb" 70</p>
<p>25. The war of currents 73</p>
<p>26. Sir MV and the hydel story of Karnataka 76</p>
<p>27. Electricity: Our breath of life 79</p>
<p>28. Coal based thermal power and its problems 82</p>
<p>29. Energy saving 85</p>
<p>30. Keep saving energy 88</p>
<p>31. E=mc<span><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-">2<\/a><\/sup></span> 90</p>
<p>32. The new world 94</p>
<p>33. Alternative sources of energy 98</p>
<p>34. More on alternative energy 104</p>
<p>35. The end of the energy trail 108</p>
</body>
</html>
