<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>THE VANISHED RAJ</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000e">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Preface</h1>
		<p>In 1951, our grandfather Navaratna Rama Rao began publishing a series of episodes drawn from his experience as an official in the Government of the Maharaja of Mysore in the first decade of the century. They appeared in the Kannada literary magazine ‘Jeevana’ (Life) edited by his close friend and junior colleague Masti Venkatesha Iyengar – one of the leading figures of modern Kannada literature and a winner of the Gnanapeetha Award. When the cycle was complete in 1954, it was brought out in book form under the title ‘Kelavu Nenapugalu’ (‘Some Reminiscences’). It was immediately recognized as a modern Kannada classic. What we present here is an English version of this celebrated work under the title ‘The Vanished Raj’. It is a unique work in modern Indian literature by a remarkable man. The author and his work are discussed separately, so we shall only briefly recount our experience and motivation.</p>
		<p>The translation was begun by Rajeshwari Rao more than thirty years ago. As a sociologist, her interest was both literary and sociological. She moved to Australia in 1985, and sent the manuscript – somewhat less than half complete – to her brother Rajaram, living in the United States. Rajaram worked on it until 1992, but his own work in ancient history and history of science prevented him from completing it for several years. It was only in 1999, that he could find the time to complete it, though it still needed some work before it could go to the publisher. He then became preoccupied with his work on ancient India, relating to Vedic and Harappan civilizations, which delayed its publication for a few more years. He was able to complete the manuscript only in 2008. The result is the volume presented here.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
