<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>THE VANISHED RAJ</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000h">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">The Author</h1>
		<p>Navaratna Rama Rao was born in the city of Mysore on May 27, 1877. His father was Navaratna Balakrishna Rao, an ‘overseer’ (of public works) in the state government. His mother was Brahmani Bai of Kallambilla. Though limited by the educational opportunities then available, Balakrishna Rao (c.1839–1925) was a man of ability. He supervised the construction of the reservoir in Hesaragatta near Bangalore which, for many years, was the main source of drinking water for the city. He was responsible also for the planning and construction of the posh residential area in Mysore known as Chamarajapuram. A road in Chamarajapuram is named after him.</p>
		<p>Rama Rao came from a Vedic Madhva-Deshasta Brahmin family of some distinction. The family name Navaratna means ‘nine jewels’ – obviously a title. There has been much speculation about its origin, some of it quite fanciful. But recent research by our cousin the late Navaratna Narayana Murthy has settled the question. It was awarded in 1638 to one Purushottamacharya and his seven brothers and a nephew for their scholarly services to the seer of Uttaradhi Mutt – a Madhva institution. Their descendants have used the title as the family name since 1638.</p>
		<p>Shortly thereafter, some members of the Navaratna clan accompanied Shahaji (father of the famous Shivaji) when he was appointed governor of Karnataka by the Bijapur Sultan. Shahaji settled some of them at a place near Bangalore that is still known as Navaratna Agrahara. (Another branch settled in Savanur near Shimoga.) In 1689, Bangalore and the surrounding areas came under the rule of Chikkadevaraja Wodeyar, the Raja of Mysore. For the next two-and-ahalf centuries, members of the Navaratna family were subjects of the Mysore rulers, with several of them attaining distinction as scholars and administrators. Today, there are probably two hundred individuals who go by the Navaratna name, living mainly in Karnataka and Maharashtra. A few members of the clan are living in the United States and Australia. Several of them have attained distinction as professionals, scholars, and writers.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-000h-01">2 </a></sup></p>
		<p>Navaratna Rama Rao attended school in Mysore and Bangalore, graduating with a degree in science from the Central College, probably in 1899. His closest friend was C. Rajagopalachari, later known as Rajaji who became a leading figure of the national movement and the first Indian Governor General of Independent India. The greatest influence on Rama Rao was John Guthrie Tait (1861 – 1945) who taught English and history at the Central College. In spite of the large age difference between the two men, they became close friends. In addition to their love of English literature, a common bond was their love of the outdoors. Their close association and friendship left an unusual mark: Rama Rao spoke English with a Scottish accent!</p>
		<p>John Tait came from an illustrious Scottish family. His father was Peter Guthrie Tait, a leading British mathematician and colleague of such luminaries as James Clerk Maxwell, Lord Raleigh, William Rowan Hamilton and others. While not in their league as a scientist, Tait was an important mathematician whose invention of ‘Quaternion’s’ paved the way for the important field of mathematics known as ‘Vector Analysis’. John’s brother Frederick was an outstanding golfer, good enough to win the British Amateur title twice. John Tait was himself a man of distinction who influenced two generations of Mysoreans. He retired from the Central College in 1920 and returned to his native Edinburgh where he spent the rest of his life. It is a pity that no biography of him appears to have been written.</p>
		<p>Tait has left what is probably the earliest recorded account of Rama Rao. In a letter he wrote to Rama Rao’s biographer Masti Venkatesha Iyengar in March 1925, he recalled Rama Rao as a youngster some thirty-five years earlier:</p>
		<p>My first memories of Navaratna Rama Rao are of a little chubby boy who used to come and look on at cricket matches. He was then in the London Mission High School (in Bangalore), and unknown to me, but I noticed that he was surrounded by a crowd of listeners to whom he discoursed with amazing volubility in Kannada and kept them in a state of great hilariousness and no doubt edified them as well.</p>
		<p>Rama Rao owed much to Tait for his interest in literature. On more than one occasion he spoke of Tait as “next only to God.” In 1930, when he was in England as a member of the Indian delegation to the Round Table Conference, he found time in the midst of a hectic schedule to visit Tait then living in retirement in Edinburgh. The high regard in which Rama Rao still held his old teacher is evident from the following letter which he wrote to Masti Venkatesha Iyengar soon after visiting Tait. (Letter dated 2 November 1930, cited in Masti’s biography of Rama Rao):</p>
		<p>I came here last night in fulfillment of a pilgrimage long overdue, and was met by our old master at the Railway Station which is not inappropriately named the Waverly Station. We dined together, and I was with him till nigh midnight. I write this letter while waiting for him this morning, for he has promised to come to take me round places of interest in Edinburgh. I have seen what I mainly came to see and whatever else there is can be but the background to the principal thing in the picture. …</p>
		<p>He has mellowed with age, and he has aged more than I had expected. [Tait had retired and left India in 1920.] There is a slight stoop in his shoulders. O time too swift, O swiftness never ceasing, but in all else he is the same as before, except perhaps that he is less cynical. His eldest boy is at Cambridge in St Peter’s [Sic: Peterhouse], being the third generation of his name to go there.</p>
		<p>Following his graduation from the Central College, Rama Rao went to Madras to study law. He and Rajagopalachari were again classmates in the Law College, and also shared lodgings. After receiving his law degree in 1902, he went to Salem where his friend Rajaji was already practising, and set up his own law practice.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-000h-02">3 </a></sup>(He was an independent lawyer and not Rajaji's junior as stated by Rajmohan Gandhi in his biography of Rajaji. He appeared in cases both with and against Rajaji.)</p>
		<p>While they remained close friends, their paths soon diverged. Rama Rao returned to Mysore to join the Maharaja's government, while Rajaji went on to become a leading figure in Mahatma Gandhi's national movement. Rama Rao had a flourishing practice in Salem, but he chose to return to Mysore apparently at his wife’s insistence. He himself records that the climate of Salem – hot and humid round the year – did not suit his wife’s health. Within a short time of joining the Maharaja’s government, he gained recognition as an exceptionally able administrator and visionary planner. Although he failed to place high enough in the Mysore Civil Service examination – due to his having offended one of the examiners – he rose to be the head of a department in the state administration. A few others rose higher only to be forgotten by history.</p>
		<p>Had he placed third instead of fourth in the examination he might have begun his career as an assistant commissioner – equivalent to a deputy collector in the British ruled provinces. Instead, he began as revenue probationer in 1904. About a year later he was appointed Amildar or the chief of a taluk (county). This officer is now called a Tehsildar. But the comparison ends here. The kind of authority and dignity that an Amildar like Rama Rao commanded in Princely Mysore (Old Mysore) is not even approximated by a modern Tehsildar.</p>
		<div class="inlay">
		<p class="myquote"><em>In the 1950s, Rajaram accompanied Navaratna Rama Rao on a visit to Narsipur. At the Laxminarayan temple, scores of people including a few who had seen Rama Rao more than forty years ago had gathered to catch a sight of the famous man. The temple priest told everyone assembled, how, his late father, whenever there was any hint of injustice used to proclaim: “These are not the days of Navaratna Rama Rao.”</em></p>
		</div>
		<p>A Tehsildar today is little more than a lackey of local politicians; an Amildar in Old Mysore was a ruler, a representative of the Maharaja, who commanded the respect, affection, and dignity growing out of five centuries of tradition and history. And the government too took care to see that the dignity of the position was maintained; in turn, the government expected the Amildar to conduct himself in a manner worthy of the people’s trust and respect.</p>
		<p>Rama Rao served as Amildar from early 1905 to 1909, first in Yedatore, and later in Narsipur, both in the Mysore District. In these areas, especially in Narsipur, he is still a legend. The main part of his Memoir covers his experiences during those five years. His position as Amildar brought him into daily contact with people from all walks of life from the humblest to the highest in the land. It was a feature of Princely Mysore that every man and woman believed that one could get justice from the Maharaja through the Amildar. It was the lives of these people that he chronicled. Had he begun his career as assistant commissioner, he would probably not have enjoyed this closeness with the people. Nor would we today have his Memoir.</p>
		<p>His career followed an unusual course. He was promoted in 1909, and by 1912 or so he was in line to become deputy commissioner (collector). At the time he was on the staff of an office known as the Economic Conference as the head of its agricultural section. He found that silk rearing, which was practiced as a cottage industry in the state, had great economic and employment potential. Developing this, however, would require the concentrated attention of a dedicated official who would be willing to place the interests of the industry ahead of his career. After much soul searching, the thirty-five-year old Navaratna Rama Rao submitted a plan to the Government recommending the establishment of a Department of Sericulture.</p>
		<p>It was an audacious move for such a young official, but apparently there were people in the Government willing to listen to him. The most <span>helpful and sympathetic of them was his senior friend Sirdar Kantha Raje Urs, the Maharaja’s uncle and the chairman of the Economic Conference. He had been Rama Rao’s superior officer earlier, and had great respect and even admiration for the young man’s talents. Once he learnt of the plan, even the Diwan, the famous Sir M. Visveshwaraya, supported him.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-000h-03">4 </a></sup>The seemingly impossible then happened. A new Department of Sericulture was created with the young Rama Rao as its Superintendent, later promoted Director. When the necessary allowance is made for the support of influential friends like Kantha Raje Urs, Rama Rao must have commanded respect at the highest levels to make this possible. </span></p>
		<p>The Government had no reason to regret its decision. Rama Rao devoted twelve years to building up the Department of Sericulture to the point where it became the most profitable industry in the state and its largest employer. He faced much hostile criticism and even ridicule. “Rama Rao must have learnt silk-making in law school” was a common joke circulating in those days. But discerning colleagues and officials recognized his achievement. The late M.A. Srinivasan, a distinguished statesman and a man of vast administrative experience who had served under Rama Rao, said that he “revolutionized the silk industry.” What Rama Rao did was to streamline and integrate all aspects of the silk industry – from research to production and distribution – so the whole thing worked as a coordinated unit. He used basic principles of what we now call ‘Operations Research’, except the field did not then exist.</p>
		<p>It was a major achievement but it came at a cost. It looked as though in the process of building up the silk industry he had sacrificed his career. As late as 1925, he was Director of Sericulture, with the rank equivalent of a senior deputy commissioner. He was reconciled to spending the rest of his career as Director, while younger and less able individuals moved up in the ranks. But in 1926 he was called to the Secretariat as Development Secretary, or ‘Secretary to the Government’ as it was more often known. He later went to England with the Maharaja’s delegation (headed by the Diwan and the Yuvaraja or the Crown Prince) for the First Round Table Conference. He retired in 1933 as Director of Industries and Commerce, but remained active as an advisor to various organizations and as member of the board of several industries.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-000h-04">5 </a></sup>He was also frequently consulted by the Government. Above all he became a major cultural figure.</p>
		<p>It is a moot question today whether he would have risen higher in the Government – possibly to the position of Diwan – had he been successful in the civil service examination. After his retirement in 1933, he was not lacking in offers of high positions – including the possibility of Diwan – from several princely states. Apparently he was not interested. After Indian independence in 1947, at Rajaji’s prodding, he accepted the position of Vice Chairman of the newly established Central Silk Board; there was after all no one better qualified.1<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-000h-05">6</a></sup> He did not like living in Delhi, but the Indian Government accommodated him by moving the office to Bangalore. Nonetheless, he soon resigned. Apparently, he was no longer interested and wanted to spend more time with his family. He was well past seventy by then. He died on November 29, 1960. His close friend Rajagopalachari outlived him by more than twelve years.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
