<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>THE VANISHED RAJ</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000i">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Literary figure</h1>
		<p>As a literary figure, Rama Rao occupies an unusual position. In his lifetime, he was greatly admired for his mastery of English and knowledge of English literature. He was an acknowledged authority on</p>
		<p>Shakespeare, consulted by scholars worldwide.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-000i-01">7 </a></sup> He wrote frequently in English, mostly on topics of the day. As a teenager, he had also published a novel in English. None of this has survived. His best known works in English are the Mahabharata and the Ramayana of C. Rajagopalachari (Rajaji), published by the Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan. It is not widely known Rama Rao refused to take credit for it – that the so-called ‘Rajaji Mahabharata’ was extensively revised and almost completely rewritten by Rama Rao when it came out in the second edition. Rajaji himself acknowledges the debt: “It is as much his as mine,” wrote Rajaji in the Preface to the second edition. (Rama Rao received a share of the royalties, but refused to have his name added as co-author.) With more than three million having read the Mahabharata alone, these are probably the two most widely read books in English written by an Indian writer, making Rama Rao (along with Rajagopalachari) the most widely read Indian author in English. (The Mahabharata is believed to have been read by nearly four million people.)</p>
		<p>In Kannada, a language he neglected as a youth, he wrote only one book and a small volume of short stories. On the strength of these, he is recognized as a master and a pioneer. “Navaratna Rama Rao’s literary output in Kannada is small in bulk,” wrote a leading critic, “but what he wrote is writ in pure gold.” His influence on modern Kannada literature is out of proportion to the size of his output. Much of his influence was through personal contact and friendship and lectures. He was a superb conversationalist who had many memorable stories. In addition, he generously gave away ideas for stories to be written by others. The best known of these is the longish story ‘Subbanna’ by Masti – arguably the most famous short story in modern Kannada. No one who ever met him could forget him. The eminent Kannada novelist A.N. Krishna Rao compared him to Samuel Johnson.</p>
		<p>When it came to scholarship per se, Rama Rao’s knowledge of Kannada was not on the same level as his English, but he had a great natural gift for the language that transcended the limits of grammar and syntax and opened new horizons for other writers. The narrative powers and the vivid imagery that distinguish his Kannada works – especially in his Memoir – are not found in his English writing; the latter, while never lacking in distinction, did not have the creative sparkle of his Kannada that lifted it to the level of genius. He often said that he wrote Kannada with his youngest daughter and granddaughters in mind. Towards the end of his life, in a radio talk, he described his views as a writer in the two languages (translated from the Kannada original):</p>
		<p>In my youth, at home, I was used to hearing both Kannada and Marathi being spoken. Since a majority of my relatives spoke Kannada, I can say that it was my mother tongue.</p>
		<p>Right from the beginning, I wanted to learn English well and impress everyone, including the English, with my mastery of the language and be praised for it. I had no great love for Kannada at the time. Even after I joined high school and college, I habitually cut Kannada classes. I passed the Kannada paper in B.A. only on the strength of my translation.</p>
		<p>I always had great love for the English language and literature. I began my study of English in high school. When in college, I had a reputation among my colleagues and teachers as being outstanding in English. I always performed well in exams. Even while a student, one of my English novels had been published by the Christian College Magazine to the admiration of my teachers and critics. When I was in Law College, I used to make money by writing articles on various subjects for several English language publications. This helped with some of my college expenses. When I joined the service I was already famous for my English. A great deal of the government correspondence was in Kannada, but what I used was colloquial Kannada mixed with Urdu [and Marathi].</p>
		<p>My experience as a government official brought me into contact with people from all walks of life. If we want to understand our people, and reach them, we must speak to them in the mother tongue. This became clear to me.</p>
		<p>Later, I had to speak frequently in the State Legislature, first as a government member, and then as an elected representative. This experience cleared my mind of all doubts I had about the adequacy of the Kannada language or its vocabulary. I gradually came to realize that if one’s thoughts are clear, Kannada language is no barrier to expressing them.</p>
		<p>As time passed, when someone, especially one of my close friends, praised anything I had written or spoken in Kannada, it gave me far greater pleasure than being praised for my English. I decided that as far as possible I would do my writing in Kannada. But I was faced with a question: what style to follow? I am not widely read in Kannada. [Sic: Relatively speaking. He knew the classics and also wrote scholarly articles. NSR] Also, highly ‘literary’ Kannada leaves most readers cold. I didn’t think it was proper to mix too much Sanskrit. My goal is to write the kind of language that our people use.</p>
		<p>For beauty of style, my ideal is the Kannada spoken by intelligent women in our cultured households. As far as I am concerned, any words or usages that appear in daily discourse are also part of Kannada regardless of their origin. For a live language to grow, should it not like a healthy animal acquire and digest food from outside? [He often said he wrote in a style so his youngest daughter and grandchildren could understand.]</p>
		<p>This represents my philosophy and my goals. It is a matter of great satisfaction to me that my countrymen have accepted my writings in the same spirit. This fills me with gratitude towards my readers.</p>
		<p>It should be clear from all this that Rama Rao’s writing reflected his joyful nature and zest for life – qualities that show through every page of his Memoir.</p>
		<p>His Memoir was highly influential and soon had many imitators. But no one has come close to matching him either in human interest, wit or spontaneity. Many of them were his superiors when it came to Kannada scholarship, but he wrote better than most of them. To begin with, few had his experience at that crucial and fascinating period in history. In addition, he had a sense of history, personally knew historic personages, had participated in historic events, but never took himself too seriously. Gifted with an irrepressible sense of humor, he always had the capacity to laugh at himself. Every generation seems to discover the work anew, and new reviews keep appearing all the time. All in all, he was the right man at the right place at the right time that happened to capture the spirit of the time and left a work for future generations to enjoy.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
