<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>THE VANISHED RAJ</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-010">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">10 </span>ON THE TRAIL</h1>
		<p><strong><em>A change of plans. Constable Sheikh Mohaddin. Infiltrating the conspirators’ camp. A council of thieves. Activities of Linga’s wife. A nocturnal wait. Recovering the jewels. A strange turn in Linga’s prosecution. </em></strong></p>
		<p>Our inability to get Linga to reveal anything made us explore other alternatives. One possibility was to get his accomplices to co-operate, willingly or unwittingly. There was a lot of activity around the station house where Linga was being held. Several of them wanted some time to speak to Linga, and the guards wanted to know what they should do with such requests. I told the guards that no one was to be allowed to see the prisoner. It then occurred to me that this might just give us the opportunity we were looking for.</p>
		<p>It did not take a genius to realize that these friends of Linga were not motivated by any kindness of heart, but wanted a share of the loot. There is a Kannada proverb to the effect that the goldsmith became a staunch devotee of the temple on learning that the eyes of the idol were made of precious stones. From all this activity I concluded that Linga’s loot was in safe keeping with some intimate of his, someone whom he particularly trusted. Linga’s devotees also had in all probability come to the same conclusion.</p>
		<p>I had announced that the Government would pay a reward of a hundred rupees for any assistance that led to the recovery of the jewels. When we probed further, we were informed that these friends of Linga were Patel Devarsay Gowda’s men who wanted to win this reward by solving the crime. I did not believe it, for there were all sorts of men who seemed to be interested. Some were men known to the Patel, some others goldsmiths, while others – though staying discreetly in the background – were Jain merchants and money lenders. I did not believe that there would be such hectic activity for a mere hundred rupees, especially on the part of the Jain merchants, who often made that kind of money in a single day. My guess was that the goldsmiths were nothing more than middle men for the Jain merchants who were after the whole loot. At the same time, as businessmen with reputations to protect, they wanted to have nothing to do directly with a character like Linga. They just wanted to buy his goods at the lowest possible price and turn a good profit. It was easy money.</p>
		<p>It was not a comfortable position for me. The name of Patel Devarsay Gowda kept cropping up in our investigation, making me wonder what game he was up to. As the Patel of Saligrama, he was my subordinate, but as I have previously described, his standing in these parts greatly exceeded his official station. It made me wonder if the Patel himself was after the gold. Up to now, in all of my dealings with him, I had found him upright, honorable and co-operative, but one never knew. There was not a day to lose. Within a short time, no trace of the gold would be left with so many men hot on its trail. Suddenly, I had an idea; could we somehow get one of Linga’s own accomplices to reveal something.</p>
		<p>I told the inspector that these people would try to persuade an increasingly anxious Linga to reveal the whereabouts of the stolen goods by promising to get him out of custody.</p>
		<p>“Why don’t we get one of these men to reveal what their scheme is?” I asked the inspector.</p>
		<p>The inspector agreed it was an excellent idea, but wanted to know how we would go about it. After some discussion, we decided to float a story that Linga would be moved to the Mysore jail. This, we hoped, would intensify the activities of these men, making them anxious to talk to him in the hopes of getting the information out of him. We would then set a trap for one or more of these men by allowing him to see and speak to Linga, with one of our own agents also present. Our agent would then report their scheme to us.</p>
		<p>Apart from unforeseen circumstances, this plan would stand or fall on the courage, resourcefulness, and, above all, the integrity of the man selected to act as our agent. If, to this man, money were more important than official recognition, he could be bought off by the promise of bribes. The joke would then be on us. He and the prisoner could make a huge profit by dividing up the loot between them, and also have some fun at our expense. Such a fiasco would soon pass into folklore to be told and retold by generations of thieves. But we could not think of anything better, and decided to go through with my scheme with me personally in charge.</p>
		<p>I also believed I had the right man for the job, a powerfully built young, police constable by name Sheikh Mohaddin. He came from a good family that had fallen on lean years. He was new to the police force; so he had not acquired the cynical outlook common among jaded junior policemen. He was ambitious to make a name for himself and gain rapid promotion. Above all, he was utterly loyal to me, regarding me as his father, teacher, and master.</p>
		<p>I briefed Sheikh Mohaddin about my plan and he enthusiastically agreed to be our agent. Our plan was to create the impression that Linga would be moved from the station to the Traveler’s Bungalow, preliminary to his transfer to the Mysore jail. Then I gave him the following detailed instructions.</p>
		<p>“Linga is in police custody in Saligrama. You are to bring him from the station house where he is held, to my charge in the traveler’s Bungalow. It is a distance of little more than a mile. The prisoner is to be securely shackled, and in no circumstances are you to let him out of your sight. The road from the station to the bungalow passes through open country, except by the pond where there is some cover – just some trees and bushes. The two of you are likely to be accosted by some of Linga’s associates who will want to talk to him. At first refuse their request, but give in later – after some pressure from them. Your job is to remember everything they say and report it to me. If they offer you a bribe, pretend you are agreeable. You must convince them that you are interested in joining them for money. There is no need for you to be in the least afraid. I’ll have two armed policemen close by, hiding in the depression less than a hundred yards from the pond.”</p>
		<p>The inspector stroked his beard and said, “Inshallah! You will be a Dafedar when this case is settled.”</p>
		<p>He patted the young man on his shoulder and handed him his own loaded revolver saying, “Keep it in your pocket.”</p>
		<p>I sent word to the station officer. “No one else is to accompany Sheikh Mohaddin. But the prisoner must be securely shackled.” We sat in the Traveler’s Bungalow waiting for the young constable and the prisoner Linga.</p>
		<p>The Saligrama traveler’s Bungalow is about a mile from the station by a road that climbs the causeway over the Kaveri. Under normal conditions, one can negotiate the distance on foot in about twenty minutes or at most half an hour. If things went according to plan, we expected it would take the two of them about an hour to reach us, with Sheikh Mohaddin escorting a shackled prisoner. But an hour and a half had passed since Sheikh Mohaddin and Linga had left the station house, and still there was no sign of them. We were getting worried, particularly about Sheikh Mohaddin’s safety. In my wild imagination, I even thought he might have been murdered by Linga’s accomplices, with all of them making their escape. I chided myself for entrusting this great responsibility to a mere boy. The inspector was equally concerned.</p>
		<p>“Sir, your plan was excellent,” he said, “but full of danger. Sheikh Mohaddin is a very good boy, but much too young. You should permit me to go and see for myself.”</p>
		<p>Reluctantly, I refused him permission. But if it had taken any longer, let alone send the inspector, I would have gone there myself. Then greatly to our relief, a policeman came and reported that Sheikh Mohaddin had just arrived with the prisoner. Linga scowled at us and turned his face away. I told the inspector to take Linga to a room and question him about some new evidence that had turned up. The inspector and two policemen took Linga away.</p>
		<p>Sheikh Mohaddin and I were now alone in the room. I turned to him and said, “It certainly took you a long time to get here. What happened?” He gave me the following account.</p>
		<p>“As soon as I stepped out of the station house, we saw Lachuma [Lachmey Gowda, a nephew of Patel Devarsay Gowda] and Pataki who were hanging around the place, disappear around the corner. The Dafedar asked me if I wanted him to accompany us. Linga laughed and said, ‘Why Dafedar Sahib! Are you afraid I might run away, carrying away this precious hundredweight of irons on me?’ I refused saying that my orders were to escort the prisoner alone. He brought another chain, joining one end of it to Linga’s shackles, and passing and locking it around my waist at the other end.</p>
		<p>“As we were out of sight of the station, Linga tried to become chummy with me. He said he and my late father were old friends. I told him I wasn’t too happy to hear that. Then he said, ‘What is a bright youngster like you doing rotting in a low paying job in the police force?’ ‘When someone settles a jagir on me, I’ll leave the force,’ I retorted. ‘Shut up for now, or I’ll knock your teeth out’.”</p>
		<p>“As we reached the pond with its tree cover, we found Lachmey Gowda waiting for us. He approached us and said, ‘Mohaddin Sahib, I would like a word with the prisoner.’</p>
		<p>‘Fine with me! But I don’t have the authority to let you speak to him. Just come to the Traveler’s Bungalow and ask the Subedar Sahib for permission. Then talk to him all you want.’</p>
		<p>‘No, no! That won’t do. I must talk to him here and now. Just a few words; it won’t hurt you’.”</p>
		<p>“Then he drew two ten rupee notes from his pocket and held them suggestively. I said, ‘Lachuma, I have seen money before. Do you want me to lose my job and eat dust?’</p>
		<p>‘I don’t understand the thinking of a Saabi like you.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-010-01">1 </a></sup>I am not asking you to eat dust. I’m giving you a chance to have biryani, to have kabab! The kind of money I am prepared to give you – it will take you two months to earn.’</p>
		<p>I pretended to look around, as if checking to see if I was being observed before falling for his bribe. Lachuma went on, ‘Are you afraid the Subedar might find out? Who’s going to tell him, unless you do? Am I going to tell? Is Mr. Linga going to tell? Is Pataki going to tell the Subedar?’</p>
		<p>Just as he said these words, Pataki materialized from behind a bush and joined the three of us. I felt a rush of relief remembering the loaded gun in my pocket. I looked around, and pretended to agree with them very reluctantly, and pocketed the proffered money. I am placing it on the table right here. Then Lachuma asked me to leave them alone. I absolutely refused saying, ‘Nothing doing. We are joined by this chain at both ends. You needn’t be afraid that I’ll give you away. After all, I am with you in this. I have taken your money, haven’t I?’</p>
		<p>Then they became threatening. They said they would break the joint and separate the two of us. I refused to be intimidated. I knew there were two armed policemen within earshot.</p>
		<p>‘Absolutely not! How then am I going to explain the broken joint to the Subedar, without giving away the whole thing? I have to be here and you must trust me.’</p>
		<p>Then Linga smiled and said, ‘He is right. He can never admit to the Subedar that he took money from us.’ Lachuma also stopped pressing me.</p>
		<p>‘There is a lot more money in it for you,’ he said. See Saabi, after our job is done, we’ll give you eighty more rupees, if you keep you mouth shut. You will be one of our own boys and we’ll look after you. But if you blab, you’ll pay for it.’ Linga and Pataki also joined in. ‘Yes Saabi, you better take care.’ I pretended to take fright and said, ‘I’ll do as you say, but I want a hundred rupees for it.’ Linga laughed and said, ‘This Saabi is a clever fellow. Let’s agree to a hundred’.”</p>
		<p>“I’ll report the rest in my own words. They said that there was not enough evidence to convict Linga, but the inspector was trying to somehow make the case stick. They felt that the inspector held Linga in custody out of fear that no one would give evidence against him if he were free. So, their idea is have him freed on bail after which the inspector will have nothing on his hands. Their plan is to engage a good lawyer and go all the way to the Sessions Court in Mysore to get Linga free. But all this required money. If only Linga would hand over some of the stolen goods to Lachmey Gowda, he would get a good lawyer, grease any palms that may be necessary, and get Linga free on bail.”</p>
		<p>“The main point was to get Linga to part with some of the gold. Lachuma promised to take responsibility for the rest. Though skeptical at first, Linga gradually came around to their view and asked how much money would be needed. ‘About five hundred,’ replied Lachuma. Linga told them to take a Lingayat priest by name Malliah to his wife in Tandrey at around midnight. She would know what to do. Then Linga warned them that the contact had to be Malliah; no one else would do. Just one more person could accompany Malliah. After many promises on both sides, and protestations of loyalty, Lachuma and Pataki left us. To explain our delay, I was advised to say that Linga had to stop to relieve himself, which took quite some time because of the shackles and the complicated way in which the two of us were jointed.”</p>
		<p>As Sheikh Mohaddin finished his story, the inspector brought Linga into my presence. Linga, as was his wont, must have thoroughly insulted the inspector with his arrogance and insolent wit, humiliating him before subordinates. The inspector’s face was flushed red; even his graying beard seemed to be bristling with indignation. “I don’t know what to do with this son of a --, sir,” said the inspector as he delivered a vicious kick that sent Linga sprawling to the ground.</p>
		<p>“An old inspector who cannot satisfy his wife,” Linga taunted, “how else is he to show his manliness, except by taking it out on innocent and helpless prisoners.”</p>
		<p>The inspector had a young wife, so his reaction to this calculated insult can be imagined. I stopped him before he could lay his hands on the prisoner. I stopped the inspector and whispered in his ear:</p>
		<p>“This man is a bastard. But I cannot permit any physical force against prisoners. It is against the law, and I will have to take note of it if it doesn’t stop. Also, I have some good news.”</p>
		<p>After I finished briefing the inspector on Sheikh Mohaddin’s story, we both felt elated at the success of my scheme so far. But as Malliah would be going to see Linga’s wife the same night, it left us with several problems to be dealt with immediately. First, we had to arrange a police party to watch the activities at Linga’s house in Tandrey. Also, the leader of the gang, Lachmey Gowda, was Patel Devarsay Gowda’s nephew. This had the potential to complicate things for us. Our course of action was clear. The priest Mallaiah would be at Linga’s house at midnight for the gold. This meant we would have to be there a few hours earlier and keep a watch.</p>
		<p>This involved some risks. Four or five of us would have to negotiate the deserted road to Tandrey – a distance of some eight miles in the dead of night. If Patel Deversay Gowda were also involved, we would be quite vulnerable; he might even have some persons in the police force reporting to him for all we knew. If such were the case, we could be quite sure that Devarsay Gowda would take steps to ensure that Mallaiah’s mission to Tandrey would be accomplished, while at the same time foil our efforts to catch them in the act. He might even have a raiding party to greet us at an ambush on the lonely road; or postpone Mallaiah’s visit to a later day. Just about anything was possible.</p>
		<p>Then I decided our best course was to send for Devarsay Gowda immediately to have him in my camp. At the very least, this would prevent Lachme Gowda or Pataki from briefing him before we could. We would flatter him by saying that his help was indispensable as he knew the area better than any of us. His presence in our group would at least eliminate the possibility of any of his men trying foul play against us.</p>
		<p>I sent word to the Patel to come over to the Traveler’s Bungalow immediately. He showed up within the hour. I briefed him on our plan, without telling him that Lachmey Gowda and Pataki were involved. I asked him to accompany us to Tandrey and requested his help. He was very enthusiastic. I invited him to dine with me. I have to admit that I had never found Devarsay Gowda to be anything but upright and co-operative in all his dealings with me so far. Everything negative I had heard was just hearsay, but I had to be careful.</p>
		<p>I next instructed my orderly to bring my horse to Tandrey the following morning. Our party left on foot for Tandrey around eight in the evening, four hours being more than enough time to cover the eight miles from Saligrama to Tandrey. But the going proved harder than we had anticipated. The wind picked up, and a cold rain began to fall. Our party consisted of the inspector and myself, both armed with revolvers, the Patel and two police constables with lathis. With just a hand lantern to show us the way in that pitch dark night, in that rain and wind, we sloshed our way through the mud. It was near eleven o’clock by my watch when we reached Tandrey. Only a few dogs barked when they saw us, but no one came out to investigate.</p>
		<p>Tandrey was a small village with just a few houses and farms. Linga’s house was at the far end of the village with no houses beyond it. It was a small house, surrounded by courtyards, with a backyard about fifty feet deep enclosed by a thorny hedge. I posted two sentries, one on either side of the house, so they could notify us should anyone be approaching the house. Patel Devarsay Gowda, the inspector, and I, covered ourselves with blankets, and crouched by the fence on the side where the village main road led to the house.</p>
		<p>As the hour passed, the rain turned into a cold drizzle, which, together with the wind made it extremely uncomfortable. We were soon soaked to the skin and sat shivering in the cold. Still, there was no sign of Mallaiah. I began to wonder if we had been forestalled, with the thieves having made good with the gold hours earlier. “May be Lachuma, Pataki, and the rest are seated before a warm fire, feasting, making fun of us crouching in this wet mud in this dirty backyard,” I thought. Devarsay Gowda was snoring lightly. The inspector, a heavy smoker, was struggling to muffle his coughs in the blanket. I cursed the awful rain, not knowing what a godsend it was to prove.</p>
		<p>Soon we heard some dogs barking. One of our sentries crawled towards us and put us on alert whispering that someone was approaching. We squeezed our way through a hole in the hedge fence and pressed ourselves against a wall. We saw a dim light approaching in our direction, and then stop a hundred or so yards from the house. There were three men. Two of them stayed back with the light. One of them approached the house, walking slowly. He all but melted into the darkness until he materialized in front of the door, less than thirty feet from us. We lost him again as he disappeared behind the wall. Just then, we heard a loud scratching sound, as if someone was scratching on the door with a sharp stone or a piece of pottery. Next we heard a muffled female voice, as if she were speaking from behind a closed door.</p>
		<p>“Who is it?</p>
		<p>“It is I, Poojari Mallaiah”</p>
		<p>“Is that you, sir? What business brings you here?”</p>
		<p>“Your husband sent me here.”</p>
		<p>“Why?”</p>
		<p>“You should know why, your husband said.”</p>
		<p>“Did he say anything else?”</p>
		<p>“He just gave me the password – dasoga. He said you know the rest.”</p>
		<p>We heard it quite clearly as both of them had to speak out loud to make themselves heard through the shut door. As soon as the Poojari pronounced the word ‘dasoga’, we heard bolts being drawn and the door open. We then heard both of them quite distinctly.</p>
		<p>“Stay where you are,” she told him. “I won’t be gone long. If you take one step in my direction, I’ll go back and lock myself in. You won’t get a single thing. I’ll be looking back as I go – just to make sure you are not following me.”</p>
		<p>“Why should I follow you, sister?” the Poojari asked in a hurt voice. “I am here because your husband sent me. If you don’t like me here, just tell me. I’ll go away.”</p>
		<p>“Please don’t get annoyed with me, brother! I’m only being careful. I won’t be gone long.”</p>
		<p>I saw a tall, strongly–built woman, Linga’s wife as we later learned, leave the house walking briskly carrying a small lamp. She disappeared in the direction away from the village, leaving us in complete darkness. I now have to wonder how long we might have stayed undiscovered without the howling wind and the rain helping to muffle our noises. The rain continued as a light drizzle. We waited for about half an hour. We then heard some footsteps and saw the woman returning at a run, coming in from a different direction than the one by which she had left.</p>
		<p>“Do you have it?” Poojari Mallaiah asked.</p>
		<p>Before she could say a word, I don’t know what happened – if the inspector coughed, or the Gowda made a noise with his blanket or what – she went into the house and slammed the door shut. The Poojari took to his heels. I didn’t know if she had had the time to hand him anything, but I sent two policemen after him. The two men who had accompanied the Poojari had disappeared a while back. Whether they were still around, or had decided discretion to be the better part of valor and left the poor Poojari to fend for himself – I have no way of knowing. I was more concerned about the woman.</p>
		<p>From the abruptness of the Poojari’s departure, I felt the woman hadn’t had the time to hand Mallaiah anything. The inspector blew the police whistle, and I fired a couple shots from my revolver to rouse the village. I ordered Linga’s wife to open the door to be searched. There was no reply. We were afraid she might have done herself some harm like hanging herself. I called for some witnesses and forced the door open and entered the house. As I previously said, Linga’s wife – that was who the woman was – was an excellent actress. As soon she saw us, she assumed the attitude of an indignant woman whose virtue was being threatened.</p>
		<p>“What is this, my lord!” she screamed. “With you as ruler, is no woman safe even within her own home? Is this the way you force yourself into the house of an honorable married woman – at this hour of the night?”</p>
		<p>This was too much for Devarsay Gowda.</p>
		<p>“Oh, shut up! What nonsense are you saying? Do you want us to believe the Subedar suffered through this mud and rain all night just for the sake of your beauty? Why, if he was so enamored of you, couldn’t he have sent for you? Is he so powerless?”</p>
		<p>How to deal with this preposterous suggestion! I told the Gowda to be quiet and made arrangements for two distinguished ladies of the village to be sent in to assist us. They soon arrived. One was the wife of the Patel of Tandrey, and the other a wealthy farmer’s wife. I explained our presence, and requested them to search Linga’s wife – I don’t recall her name, so I’ll call her Nanjamma. The house was quite small, just one room with a living area and kitchen. The inspector and the policemen searched every inch of it and found no trace of gold. The ladies also searched Nanjamma mercilessly and found nothing.</p>
		<p>The two police constables had caught up with Poojari Mallaiah, and brought him in by early morning. He had nothing on him. Even if he had, I thought he would surely have thrown it away before being caught. But he insisted he knew nothing. He had been instructed to say the word dasoga to Tandrey Linga’s wife, and take whatever she gave him and hand it over to Lachmey Gowda. He said he knew nothing beyond that. I felt he was telling the truth.</p>
		<p>It was now broad daylight. I now had the onerous task of writing a report that our effort had turned up nothing. Before doing it, I thought I should take one more look. The inspector and the Patel of Tandrey accompanied me. I looked around the place. It was an ordinary house, somewhat smaller than the average, but adequate for a childless couple. At first I found nothing suspicious. Then, I inspected the cooking stove and the sink. The sink was clogged up, with standing water and smelly. This struck me as unusual for a house being lived in. More suspiciously, two planks of mango wood had been placed to cover the stagnant water. The planks were perfectly dry, except for a few drops of water splashed on them. This suggested that they had been recently placed. I brought it to the inspector’s attention and asked the Patel to remove them. There was no need to search any further. Gleaming dimly through the brackish water was a yellowish object. It was one of the gold ingots described by Appaji. It weighed about eight tolas. I wrote my report.</p>
		<p>But Linga’s wife was by no means at the end of her wits. She insisted that the whole thing was a plant. She accused that it might be the inspector, or Patel Devarsay Gowda who never liked her husband. Heaven forbid! Why, it might even be the Subedar himself, hoping to be promoted. The village elders and the leaders of her caste tried to reason with her, but she would not budge. The police wanted to take her to the station, and use their usual method, but I would have nothing of it.</p>
		<p>Then an idea struck me, something I should have seen long ago. The rain we had suffered through in the night was a slow drizzle. It was enough to soften the soil – enough to catch footprints, but not hard enough to wash them away. So, it should be possible to track down the path taken by Linga’s wife when she went to retrieve the gold. Ordering my companions to wait, I went following the footprints made by Nanjamma on her way out. It soon led to a field grown thick with jowar about waist high, and I lost the trail. I then remembered that on her return, she had come by a different route. So I went back and followed her return trail. This time I had no difficulty. I reached an open spot where the trail ended, and saw also the incoming trail of footprints from out of the jowar growth. The ground showed signs having been freshly dug up; even the implements – a small shovel and a pick – were still lying there. I hailed a farmer working in the adjacent field and gave him instructions to bring the party and Linga’s wife from her house. I also instructed him to make sure that no one stepped on the footprints.</p>
		<p>They arrived within a few minutes. I turned to Nanjamma and said, “Isn’t this the place where you have hidden the stolen goods?”</p>
		<p>By now she had shot her bolt. All the defiance was gone and she broke down completely.</p>
		<p>“Lord, I’ll tell you everything, but don’t hand me over to the police. A felon’s wife is always a widow.”</p>
		<p>The poor woman had tears in her eyes, but this time there was no acting. Then she herself dug the rain-softened earth with the pick and exposed a dirty cloth bundle buried less than a foot underneath. She took the bundle and handed it to me. We saw several pieces of gold jewelry set with diamonds, rubies and other precious stones. She told us that Linga had left them with her for safe-keeping. Believing it to be unsafe to have them in the house, she had buried them in a spot in their farm. I next asked her about Poojari Mallaiah.</p>
		<p>“My husband told me that he would send Poojari Mallaiah to me if he needed any money,” she told us. “Mallaiah would use the password dasoga. He was to be given the larger of the two gold ingots prepared by Appaji. He advised me on no account to keep it in the house. If Devarsay Gowda’s men get wind of it that would be the end of it.”</p>
		<p>We prepared a careful, on-the-spot report. By then our horses had been brought in. I took possession of the jewels and rode back to the Saligrama police station with the inspector. I placed the things on a table and covered them with a cloth and asked Linga to be brought in. The inspector stayed with me in the room. As soon as Linga was brought into the room inspector said, “Speak up you bastard, and tell us where you have hidden the gold.”</p>
		<p>“All your brain has melted and drained through your beard, inspector. How many times do I have to tell you I don’t know?”</p>
		<p>The inspector drew the cloth back with a flourish like unveiling a statue. “Look here you mother___!”</p>
		<p>Linga just blinked. He was speechless for a moment, and then turned to me and said, “So, the bitch gave up the whole thing! What is the point denying it, my lord? Write it down sir, here is what happened. I knew Krishnappa’s relative Gangadhar Appa when we were both in jail. He ran into me when I was eating lunch by the river. I asked him what he was doing in this town. He said, ‘I have come to a wedding. They are my people, my relatives. So there are a few small things I can do for them, to make life a little easy during the ceremony.’</p>
		<p>‘I am also one of ‘your people’. Why don’t you help me and make my life also a little easy?’</p>
		<p>“He gave me a knowing wink, but pretended to be shocked. He gave me a sermon about morality, religion, dharma, karma and other such bullshit that these haruvas<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-010-02">2</a></sup> like to bore us with. After he had finished his wind, he told me to wait by the backdoor promising to see if he could find something. About midnight, Gangadhar Appa brought me a bundle and said, ‘Half of it is mine, you understand.’ My lord, you know the rest.”</p>
		<p>The recovered jewelry tallied perfectly with our list. Even the ornaments that Appaji had melted down could be accounted for. Out of three and a half to four thousand rupees’ worth of valuables, we were missing only about two or three hundred rupees worth of jewelry. We took the prisoner and the property to Yedatore. I still remember with emotion the joy and the gratitude of the poor Brahmin couple when they saw the stolen property was recovered with God’s grace, and their escape from disgrace. We could find no evidence against Gangadhar Appa other than Tandrey Linga’s account of his part as his accomplice. He had once been convicted for theft, but several highly respectable people testified that he had turned a new leaf, and was leading an honest life. He was not charged.</p>
		<p>The case had a strange aftermath. I had expected the prosecution to be easy. In all my years as lawyer and judge, I have rarely come across a case in which the evidence was so clear cut. It was heard in the division first class magistrate’s court. [i.e., presided over by the assistant commissioner]. By a perverse twist of logic comprehensible only to the presiding judge, the court ruled that the goods recovered had been stolen from Krishnappa’s house, but Linga’s guilt had not been established! <sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-010-03">3 </a></sup></p>
		<p>The prosecution sent an application to the district magistrate’s court. A warrant was also obtained to keep the defendant in custody so that he would not be free to intimidate witnesses, and avenge those who had co-operated with the police. The district court ruled that there was enough evidence to warrant a retrial; but since Tandrey Linga was a well-known felon with several convictions on record, the court ruled that he merited punishment exceeding the district magistrate’s authority, and the case should be heard in a higher Sessions Court.</p>
		<p>The Sessions judge was one of those who distrusted all prosecution cases and witnesses. I was called in as a witness both by the prosecution and the defense. Linga’s lawyer cross-examined me as follows:</p>
		<p>“Did you see the accused steal?”</p>
		<p>“No.”</p>
		<p>“Did the accused hand you the stolen property?”</p>
		<p>“No.”</p>
		<p>“Was it not his wife who handed you the property?”</p>
		<p>“I have already given a detailed account of the events. You have heard all the witnesses. It is not possible to answer such a question with a simple ‘yes’ or ‘no’. Do you want me to go over the whole story again?”</p>
		<p>The judge said to me assuming an attitude of pompous officiousness, “That is no concern of yours. Just answer the question ‘yes’ or ‘no’.”</p>
		<p>“Then, you must regard everything I have said so far as the answer,” I retorted, greatly to the judge’s displeasure. He remained annoyed with me. Continuing his cross-examination, the defense lawyer next asked me, “Could some other person not have stolen the goods and given it to the wife of the accused?”</p>
		<p>I turned to the court and asked, “How should I answer this question? Am I supposed to say ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to this question also – as you just instructed?”</p>
		<p>This made the judge angrier. This time though, he directed it at the defense lawyer and said, “Why are you wasting the court’s time with such absurd questions?”</p>
		<p>Before the case could be decided, I was transferred to a different taluk. I heard the judge acquitted Linga. But the Government appealed the decision to a higher court (chief magistrate’s court) where Tandrey Linga was given a stiff sentence of five years. The property was returned to Krishnappa and by him to the owners. The promised reward of a hundred rupees – I divided it equally between Sheikh Mohaddin and another constable who accompanied us and had managed to catch Polari Malaya after his attempted escape. The inspector was highly commended, and I was also congratulated. I wrote a glowing letter to the deputy commissioner (DC) and also to the IGP<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-010-04">4 </a></sup>about Patel Diverse Gowda's assistance in the case, and got him a special certificate. Sheikh Mohadin was soon promoted to Dafedar.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
