<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>THE VANISHED RAJ</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-011">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">11 </span> ASSASSINS OF ABBOOR</h1>
		<p><strong><em>Story of a family feud that ends in murders. A heroic policeman helps capture the murderers. The assassins escape. A manhunt. A close shave with a ‘wild boar’ hunter. A narrow miss. Meeting the murderer’s wife. The finale. </em></strong></p>
		<p>I was involved in another major criminal investigation during my term as Amildar of Yedatore. Even before taking charge of Yedatore taluk, I had become familiar with the case – a sensational murder in the taluk involving two brothers. I was fully briefed by Mr. Krishnaji Rao, who handed me charge of the taluk. It was a gruesome affair. The crime had taken place in the village of Abboor on the banks of the Kaveri. The assassins and the victims were cousins living as neighbors in the same village. As often is the case, the whole thing started out as a land dispute. Refusing compromise, the two parties fought it out in the courts to the bitter end. The courts awarded the title to all of the land to one party, depriving the opposing party – two brothers by name Dodda Haida and Putta Swamy, of everything. It was a rout.</p>
		<p>Sensing trouble, village elders and other friends tried to persuade the victorious party to be generous and share with the losers, but to no avail. Its leader was also not exactly reticent about his legal triumph. Like the ill-fated Duryodhana in the ‘Mahabharata’, the winner pompously declared, “I shall not yield even a single needlepoint of land!” The losers had also to contend with the scornful laughter of the village women and barbs from their erstwhile friends:</p>
		<p>“Ha! Dodda Haida, have you recovered from it all? Look! Your kinsman Madiah is harvesting gold in your land! Have you ever had a crop like that?”</p>
		<p>“Well, let us hope he is still around to eat what he grows,” retorted Dodda Haida. Putta Swamy said nothing, but just smiled.</p>
		<p>The leader of the victorious party was Dodda Haida’s cousin Madiah.</p>
		<p>“If you go on quarrelling about this,” said a friend of Madiah’s to Dodda Haida, “You will lose everything you have to the lawyers. Why, the only property you haven’t yet mortgaged is the graveyard!”</p>
		<p>“I have left the graveyard to you,” replied Dodda Haida. “You will gain it without any lawyers or courts.” By then the two brothers had decided to go after Madiah and his family. They kept a watch on the movements of their victorious but unsuspecting kinsmen.</p>
		<p>It was spring.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-011-01">1 </a></sup>The wind was favorable to chaffing, and the farmers were taking bundles of harvested grain (with stalks) to their winnowing grounds. One particular evening, Madiah had planned to begin moving the harvested grain – rice paddy – to his house for storage, assisted by his wife, brothers, and a few servants. This gave Dodda Haida his opportunity. He posted his brother Putta Swamy to stand guard with an axe, just a few yards from the door of Madiah’s house. He positioned himself by the door armed with a machete, determined to cut down anyone who came out of the house. The whole thing had been planned in every detail. The victims had no inkling of what was in store for them.</p>
		<p>The first to fall was a servant who was cut down in single swipe as he came out. He fell without a sound. Next, it was Madiah’s turn. He received such a vicious blow across his head that a part of it was completely sliced off. He was struck again as he staggered. He screamed as he fell, and his wife and eight-year-old son ran out of the house. They were both dispatched with a single blow each. While Dodda Haida was thus engaged, Madiah’s brother saw blood flowing in the drainage gutter, and tried to make his escape through the opposite end of the alley. He was chased down the alley by Putta Swamy and cut down. His wife managed to escape by running into a neighbor’s house. No one in the village was willing to go near the assassins, as they stood soaked in blood, with weapons in their hands dripping with blood. Dodda Haida seemed to have gone mad. He kept screaming that he would cut down anyone who came near him.</p>
		<p>The Patel sent a report to the police in Honsoge, the nearest police outpost. It had two policemen and a rifle, but no ammunition. One of the policemen was a Brahmin youth by name Gundappa as I recall, who proved to be a very brave and resourceful young man. The other was a somewhat older married man. They collected some stout-hearted villagers from Honsoge and hurried forth to Abboor. By then it was night, but there was plenty of moonlight. The Patel gave the police party a detailed account of the events.</p>
		<p>“Dodda Haida is standing at the entrance to the alley with an axe,” the Patel told the police. “Putta Swamy has left the scene and seems to have gone into hiding. Dodda Haida is threatening to cut down anyone that goes near him. I think he has gone mad. His wife has locked herself in their house and is scared to death of him. He is a huge man— very strong, and doesn’t seem to care if he gets killed. He is sure to murder anyone who goes near him. Our only option is to shoot him dead or least bring him down by wounding him with the rifle.”</p>
		<p>But how to shoot him with a rifle with no cartridges? Finally, the young constable Gundappa came up with a bold plan. He sent for some chilli powder from the Patel’s home and mixed it with mud. His plan was to place a policeman’s turban on a lathi or club, slowly bring it into Dodda Haida’s sight from a concealed position near the entrance to the alley where he was standing. The hope was that the murderer would strike it with his weapon, taking it for a policeman in that dim light. This would give enough time for Gundappa to throw mud mixed with chilli powder in the murderer’s eyes and wrestle him down and hold on to him long enough for his companions to rush in and apprehend the murderer. Chilli powder is excruciatingly painful when it gets in the eye and causes temporary blindness. Mixing it with mud would help the powder travel farther through the air when thrown. It was a bold plan, but full of danger. I have already said that Gundappa was a brave lad. He now showed his mettle.</p>
		<p>“This is my plan,” he told his companions, “and I will take responsibility for it. But Dodda Haida is a large man and much stronger than me. You must immediately come and seize him after I grab hold of him.”</p>
		<p>It went exactly as planned. Gundappa first drew the assailant’s attention with a few halting thrusts of the turban mounted on the lathi, bringing it into his vision as if a frightened policeman were peeking. Dodda Haida came near the place with his weapon raised, and Gundappa abruptly thrust the turban almost in the assailant’s face. Dodda Haida reflexively struck the turban with his weapon, which got stuck in the cloth. In a perfectly timed maneuver, Gundappa threw the powder in the assailant’s face who let out a scream and dropped his weapon. The young policeman launched himself on the murderer and threw his arms around him. Both men fell to the ground. His companions rushed in and handcuffed Dodda Haida and pinned him down. Putta Swamy, who was hiding in a boat in the bushes by the river, was apprehended the next day.</p>
		<p>As I said, all this had taken place a few months before my taking charge of the taluk. In fact, the case was being heard in court in Mysore when I received orders to assume charge as Amildar of Yedatore taluk. But it was such a sensation, that it was still being talked about when I took charge. I was to have several adventures with these two murders, which I will next relate.</p>
		<p>Their guilt was established in the Sessions Court and they were both sentenced to be hanged. They appealed against the judgment, and the two men were kept in the Mysore jail with a final decision still pending in the chief court. There was little chance of the chief court reversing the lower court’s decision; but in the meantime the two men pulled off a daring escape, creating an even greater sensation. In the dead of night, they murdered the jail warden, and made their escape by scaling the prison walls using the dead man’s leg straps (in those days policemen used lengthy leg straps with their boots instead of stockings). Their act was not discovered until the next morning when the warden’s body was found. It was not clear if they had the assistance of any outside accomplices. This happened when I had been Amildar for a few months.</p>
		<p>Their daring escape made the case still more sensational. Displaying great courage, my deputy commissioner (DC) Sparkes and a few reserve policemen searched through the sugar cane fields surrounding the area, firing their guns several times but accomplishing little more than damaging the standing crops with their boots and bullets. We then received reports that the two escaped convicts had returned to their native village and gone into hiding, assisted by a few of their kinsmen. According to these reports they were spending their daylight hours on some rafts in the river or in the surrounding woods, making their way to the village under the cover of darkness for food and other supplies. Sometimes food would be taken to them.</p>
		<p>When he received this report, DC Sparkes Sahib came to Abboor to look for the fugitives. I joined him in the search. We rode around carrying our weapons, and though we no doubt presented an impressive sight, our search proved fruitless. I politely pointed out to the DC, that to be caught by such inept exercises, the two men must not only be murderers but idiots as well. I told him that without reliable informers, looking for them in their own home territory was like searching for needles in a haystack. With this in mind I suggested to Sparkes that our strategy should be to recruit some informers, and this would take both time and money. I also pointed out that their accomplices who were carrying food to them had probably armed them as well. It was sheer folly for us to try tracking them in their own territory. It was safer to follow a wounded tiger.</p>
		<p>Sparkes wholeheartedly agreed with me. With the Government’s approval he announced a reward of a thousand rupees for anyone catching the fugitives and other substantial rewards for those providing assistance leading to their arrest.</p>
		<p>As a sportsman, I have always enjoyed the pursuit of dangerous animals like tigers and leopards, and this hunt promised to be more exciting than any of them. The monetary reward didn’t mean a whole lot to me, but as a young sportsman, the challenge of this unique hunt – pitching my brain against theirs – appealed to my imagination. I also thought it would make my name famous in government circles, and more importantly, I would gain public fame. I devoted every spare moment, my energy, and my brains to this manhunt. I had a few hair-raising experiences, and one, just one, touching and even humbling experience.</p>
		<p>My first priority was to find some informers. The inspector brought to me a police informer by name Laxmi Pathiah, whom I will call L. Pathiah for short. He was a petty trader who did his business selling retail to villagers in santhes (village trading gatherings). His modus operandi was to tour villages and buy grain and produce wholesale from the farmers at low prices, and sell retail at the santhes in various villages. Santhes are held on different days of the week in different villages, which allowed him to sell his produce in several neighboring villages each week. Abboor, Hadya, and Honsoge, were among the villages on his circuit. This allowed him to turn a decent profit and also brought him into contact with a lot of people from whom he would pick up stray pieces of gossip. He often traded this information for money with the police. He knew both the murderers and several of their kinsfolk. His work also brought him into contact with village officials including the Patel and the Shanbog of Abboor. He agreed to co-operate with the police by gathering any information he could about the fugitives.</p>
		<p>His method was to meet the inspector after dark and supply any useful information that he might have. I met him once, and a few days later he came around to my house trying to talk to me directly. I told him to report to the inspector who would keep me informed. Frankly I was repelled by his personality and mannerisms. He would act a little familiar and look at me as if we shared confidences. I told the inspector to instruct him not to behave like that. With his reputation, people might think that he was a pimp procuring assignments for me. The inspector gave him a stiff warning.</p>
		<p>A few days later, the inspector sent a note alerting me that he had new information about the murderers. L. Pathiah was in the inspector’s office waiting to give me his report. I went to the police station. He gave us the following information.</p>
		<p>“Dodda Haida and Putta Swamy are no longer in the vicinity of Abboor. Dodda Haida is having an affair with a washerwoman, which has made his wife very angry. The washerwoman’s husband is also furious and would like nothing better than putting a knife into him. He would be delighted to hand them over to the police if he could. Later they went to Saligrama trying to enlist Patel Devarsay Gowda’s help. The Gowda refused to have anything to do with them, but some of his men advised them to seek Tandrey Linga’s refuge. Linga kept them in hiding, and sent them food for a few days and some old blankets. A few days later, Linga took the two fugitives to a wealthy merchant in Holey Narsipur just across the taluk boundary. At the time of this reporting, the two fugitives are still said to be under his protection.”</p>
		<p>This was some months before the wedding night jewel robbery at Krishnappa’s house when Linga was still free. Holey Narsipur is in the taluk adjacent to Yedatore. I shall not disclose the name of this merchant protecting the fugitives out of consideration for his descendants who are still living. Some years earlier he had served a two-year sentence for forgery. His friends claimed that he had been the victim of a conspiracy hatched by his enemies. He and Linga, who was also serving a sentence at the time, had become acquainted in prison. His own traumatic experience had made the man sympathetic to the plight of others that had fallen foul of the law. When Linga brought these men, he hid them in a secret place on his own property.</p>
		<p>The inspector later told me that he knew this rich merchant. He had been one of the officers handling the case, and there was some ill-will between the two men. The inspector felt it would be better for me to speak to the man myself, without his getting involved in the case. I sensed that the inspector suffered from an inferiority complex and wanted to avoid confronting a rich and well-connected man who might even have been an innocent victim of the inspector’s zeal.</p>
		<p>I sent a message requesting him to see me at his earliest convenience. He sent word back that he was going to Mysore in a few days and would stop by to see me on the way. I was in court when he showed up. I sent him to be seated in my chamber and went to see him a little later. His manner was dignified, and whatever his past, he did not by any means look to me like a low type of person. I was somewhat at a loss as to how I should to broach the subject with a man of his bearing and social standing.</p>
		<p>“I asked to see you because there is something with which you might be able to help me,” I finally said to him. I then briefed him on the information that had come to light regarding the two murderers said to be under his protection, and asked him if I could expect any assistance in apprehending them. I tried very hard not to offend him, but must have touched a sore spot. He took violent umbrage, drew himself to his full height, and said in a voice full of indignation:</p>
		<p>“This insinuation by you is utterly uncalled for. How can a person of my standing conceivably have any association with the type of characters you describe? Some petty-minded men have brought you some malicious stories about me. I would have thought you might have better judgment than believing them. I can only suppose that your education and position of authority at such a young age have made you so arrogant that you forget yourself. You are very young with little or no knowledge of the world. I think you are easily influenced by these police inspectors whom you probably don’t know too well. If this is all you have to say, I’ll take your leave.”</p>
		<p>I was angry at his attitude, but felt there might be a grain of truth in what he was saying.</p>
		<p>“Compose yourself sir,” I said to him firmly, “and sit down. You can’t just walk out like that. You said power had gone to my head. Well, I’m prepared to use that power right this moment to keep you here if necessary. I may not know the police inspector too well, but your knowledge of him seems to be more intimate. You said I spoke without regard to your position and breeding, and you may be right. I was under the impression you were Mr. ______. If I have been wrong, you have my apologies.”</p>
		<p>After this, Mr. ______ came crashing down from his lofty perch, landing with his feet firmly on the ground.</p>
		<p>“I met Tandrey Linga during my days of misfortune,” he said mildly. “Yes, I do know the man. But it is not true that we are friends. Linga came to me a few days ago and brought me the Abboor story, asking me to help the fugitives. I told him I wanted no part of the business, but was prepared to do my bit for a couple of starving men. I gave him some money and told him to get lost and not bother me again. That is all I know.”</p>
		<p>A few days after this meeting, I received a report that Tandrey Linga had taken the fugitives to Frazerpet, to the southwest of Mysore, where he had made arrangements for them to stay in a Lingayat monastery disguised as mendicants called jangamas. I decided to go to Frazerpet to try and catch the fugitives with the help of local officials if necessary. We needed someone who could identify the murderers, as neither the inspector nor I was familiar with their appearance. I had just once caught a glimpse of them as they were being taken to court in Mysore, and the inspector had never seen them. So we took with us our policeman Gundappa, whose bravery in apprehending Dodda Haida I have already related.</p>
		<p>Frazerpet in those days had a large forest depot. That area is famous for teak, rosewood, and other valuable timber, and used to be a major timber trading post. The inspector assumed the role of a Chowbini (Muslim) timber merchant, and I travelled as his accountant and clerk. We stayed at the choultry. Gundappa claimed to be my cook, and the other policeman Sheikh Abdulla travelled as the inspector’s cook.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-011-02">2 </a></sup>I had with me an official seal from the magistrate’s office to identify myself to the authorities in Frazerpet.</p>
		<p>Our informer L. Pathiah was also in Frazerpet, traveling by the way of Hunsoor and Periya Patna, ostensibly on business. He told us that our two men were hiding out in the region. They sometimes hid in the jungles south of the river where there were several Lingayat villages. He said he knew a Lingayat man who would keep him informed. We later saw this man. He was literally shaking with fear. He told us that the Lingayat populace of the region would take turns to carry food to them. Some days earlier the younger brother Putta Swamy had died of snakebite. He had been buried in an improvised grave in the jungle. The older brother spent the days in the jungle and the nights on various machans in the few fields in the area. A machan is an elevated platform on stilts found in nearly all farms for keeping watch and to shoot or otherwise drive away crop destroying animals like wild pigs and deer.</p>
		<p>“If we know the field where he is to sleep on a particular night,” he said, “we can catch him.”</p>
		<p>“If you help us catch him by getting us that information, we’ll give you a large reward and a certificate,” I told him.</p>
		<p>“No, thank you my lord,” he replied, “not a certificate. My life won’t be worth anything if the people know that I gave up Dodda Haida. People here admire him as a brave man. To them he has become a folk hero.”</p>
		<p>This was cause for concern. To us he was a wretched murderer, but to the people here he was a hero! I decided I could expect no help from such people. On the other hand, this might even place us in some danger – with only four of us in surrounded by villagers hostile to us.</p>
		<p>Situated south of the Kaveri River, much of Hunsoor taluk in those days was jungle. There were not more than half a dozen unhealthy villages within a fifteen-mile radius. Around these villages some patches of forest had been cut down yielding clearings of about fifty acres each. What little farming there was in these clearings was subsistence farming, barely adequate to feed each farmer and his family. These farmers derived some additional income by working for the forest department – maintaining fire-tracks and forest trails by clearing undergrowth and other minor work. The problem was to somehow get these villagers to help us. No member of our party could go to these villagers directly; Dodda Haida would recognize Gundappa, while I as a Mysore Brahmin and the inspector and Sheikh Abdulla as Muslims would be sure to arouse these Lingayat villagers’ suspicions with our unfamiliar Kannada accents.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-011-03">3 </a></sup>There was no way we could mix with them and win their confidence.</p>
		<p>I then saw a way. These villagers depended on the goodwill of the forest officers for their livelihood. So, it must be possible to get some information out of them by working through some employees of the forest department to whom these villagers would feel obligated. I asked the forest ranger of Periya Patna, about fourteen miles from our camp, to come and see me. When he came, I explained our situation to him and asked for his help. A forest guard was also with him.</p>
		<p>“My forest guard,” the ranger told me, “he is a smart fellow. He will do whatever you ask him, but he expects to be rewarded for his efforts. Nothing special – just put in a good word about him to the DC or the conservator of forests. I’ll also co-operate with you fully – whatever way I can.”</p>
		<p>I asked the forest ranger if he had a gun. He did not. I told him it would not be safe to take him with us, but if he could camp at the forest lodge at a place called Koppa, five miles from our camp, we could send for him as needed. He agreed and took our leave.</p>
		<p>I next briefed the forest guard – I don’t remember his name now – and instructed him to visit each village in the vicinity and get whatever information he could about Dodda Haida’s movements. In particular, we were interested in knowing whether he was hiding in the area at all, and if so, who was supplying him with the food, and on whose property he would be spending the nights. The forest guard returned to us a couple of days later and gave us the following information, “On the other side of the river, about five miles from here, is the village of Maleyoor. There seems to be a fugitive, a stranger to these parts, being sheltered by the villagers. He spends the days hiding in the undergrowth in the jungle and sleeps in one of the sentinel huts or a machan. He has the Patel’s own protection. I have an informant in the village who told me, ‘The fugitive sleeps in a different field each night. The Patel himself arranges his schedule. Once the decision is made, the Patel instructs the owner of the place to leave a meal for the man on the night he is scheduled to stay at the place.’ My informant has promised to let me know as soon as he is able to obtain prior information about the place where this man is going to spend the night. We can then lay in wait for him and catch him.”</p>
		<p>Finally it seemed we were getting somewhere. Four days later the guard came and told us, “Tonight, he is going to spend the night at the Patel’s own hut.”</p>
		<p>He also told us that the informant had shown him the field and also the hut where the fugitive (Dodda Haida) would be spending the night. We left our camp at Frazerpet at about three-thirty in the afternoon and reached the forests near Maleyoor just before dark. Our party consisted of myself, the inspector, constable Gundappa, and the forest guard. Gundappa was indispensable as the only one capable of identifying Dodda Haida. The inspector had a revolver with him and I had my Winchester repeating rifle.</p>
		<p>We waited quietly in the forest until nightfall and entered the field shown to us by the forest guard. It was a solitary jowar field surrounded by forest growth, with a few other small fields – barely an acre each – scattered about in the clearings. Jowar stalks stood man-high, offering us sufficient concealment. At one corner of the field stood a machan on stilts about seven or eight feet high, on which was a small hut with thatched roof. It was obviously being used as a watch sentinel.</p>
		<p>It was soon dark and we waited lying on the ground amidst the jowar stalks, a short distance to the machan hut. Shortly, we heard a rustling in the field, indicating that someone or something was on the move. We soon saw a man muffled in a blanket walking stealthily from the direction of the forest, approaching the machan. As he came to the machan we saw indistinctly that he was a large man and carried a gun in his hands. The light was too poor to make out his face. He looked around as if searching for something. He then picked up a small ladder lying on the ground and rested it upright against the machan. Gun in hand, he climbed up to the machan and drew the ladder up with him.</p>
		<p>I turned towards Gundappa and made what I thought was an inconspicuous gesture to check if he could tell if it was our quarry. I must have caught his attention and alarmed him, for he gave an audible gasp, aimed his gun in my direction and fired. The bullet whizzed by my ear missing me narrowly. It was a rifle! Not knowing if he was carrying a double or a repeater, I ducked, dropping face first into the ground vegetation. <sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-011-04">4 </a></sup></p>
		<p>The inspector misread my move. It was purely a defensive maneuver on my part but he thought that I had been hit. He stood up, raised his revolver and emptied its chamber in the man’s direction, each shot followed by an Urdu obscenity. All six bullets missed the platform by several feet and buried themselves in the trees in the background. The revolver is a very difficult weapon to shoot accurately, and it takes a good deal of practice to hit a target even at close range. We were a good thirty yards from the machan so there was little chance of a revolver bullet hitting him except by accident.</p>
		<p>As soon as the inspector began shooting, the man let loose a loud wail, threw his gun down and jumped off the platform. He then stood there on the ground with his arms raised, continuing to wail. I stood up, drew a bead on the man with my rifle and shouted, “Hold up your hands. Don’t move or I’ll shoot.”</p>
		<p>Having emptied the chamber, the inspector had begun to reload his revolver. I told him not to act in haste, and asked Gundappa to go and see if he was our man, all the while covering him with my rifle. Gundappa went up to the man, lit and held a match to his face and called back, “No sir, he’s not our man.”</p>
		<p>I then asked Gundappa to pick up the man’s gun and question him. He told us that he was the owner of the field.</p>
		<p>“Why did you fire at us?” I asked him.</p>
		<p>“Pigs [wild boar] are a menace in these parts,” he told us. “They do so much damage to crops that many farmers have been ruined by them. They absolutely infest this area. So I sit up every night to get rid of as many of them as I can. When I heard a noise I assumed it was a pig. Nothing else ever shows up in this wild place except for an occasional deer.”</p>
		<p>What to do? Our disappointment notwithstanding, we could see the humor of the absurd situation. (Our man didn’t seem to find it so funny.) We had evidently been misinformed about Dodda Haida’s whereabouts. We told him that we too were after wild boar.</p>
		<p>“We were also here for pig shooting. It’s all right. We’re lucky that nobody got hurt. We’ll go somewhere else for our boar hunting.”</p>
		<p>I think he believed us because we had with us a forest guard in uniform. We returned to our camp in Frazerpet. We had not only failed on that particular night, our whole plan went awry. A few days later, someone tried to shoot our forest guard. This scared him sufficiently to make him ask for a transfer. His informant also left the area and took up a less hazardous job at a coffee plantation.</p>
		<p>My efforts to catch the murderer were sporadic and spread over the two years that I was Amildar of Yedatore. I feel it is better to report all my experiences here in one place. The next episode took place a long time after the ‘pig shooting’ fiasco. The seedy informer Laxmi Pathiah had been dismissed as unreliable. My inspector Khaja Mohammad Khan who had been so helpful to me in the case of Tandrey Linga and the jewel robbery was also transferred to a different place. This was a serious loss to me. He had great affection for me tinged with a little pity. He said to one of his friends who reported it back to me, “Poor boy!” he exclaimed, “He thinks the whole world is as straight as he is. He doesn’t understand that a worm must be crushed on the spot. He doesn’t know that any means justifies a good end. He is young, but he’ll learn.”</p>
		<p>I too had great affection for him and trusted the man’s honesty and courage. He was a very able officer, a man of few words, but not without a sense of humor. I remember one particular instance of his dry wit. After his transfer, he was required to move within a month. He had a large family and he needed more money than what the Government gave him to cover his moving expenses. He was used to buying things on credit and owed money in several shops of Yedatore. This had made him borrow a few hundred rupees from a local moneylender to clear his loans. As he was about to leave, this moneylender came to the inspector and raised the question of repayment, thinking it the best time.</p>
		<p>“Yes, I remember your loan. I’ll send the money as soon as I can,” the inspector replied.</p>
		<p>“Does it mean you’ll return it next month?” the moneylender asked.</p>
		<p>“No sir, it’ll take another three or four months.”</p>
		<p>“That long?” asked the moneylender with some consternation. “Please send it sooner saheb. If not next month – at least the month after,”</p>
		<p>“I can always try, but is it so easy?” the inspector asked. “I’m going to a strange town. I have to borrow money first before I can repay you. It will take me a few months at least – to find another bloody fool like you willing to loan money to a man like me.”</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>Returning to Dodda Haida, our new informant was a washerman by name Chowda who hated the murderer. The washer man’s wife and the murderer were said to be lovers. The new inspector – one Devaraj Urs of Moogur – sent for the washer man to see if there was any possibility of catching Dodda Haida by enlisting the help of his own wife, whose relationship with her husband had gone from bad to worse. Both the washerwoman and Dodda Haida had reason to fear Chowda, who was now in a vengeful mood. The police kept a close watch on the village but there was no sign of the fugitive. Over a period of time we began to receive reports that Dodda Haida was seeing his wife again, and there may have been reconciliation. He had fallen ill and his wife had moved him to a raft on the river and nursed him back to health. Occasionally, he even visited her at her home late at night and left before sunrise. The washer man promised to watch her house and report back to us.</p>
		<p>One night Chowda came down to see me when my dear friend Rajaji<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-011-05">5 </a></sup>was visiting me. It was past midnight; Rajaji and I were busy catching up on our experiences. We had not seen each other since my leaving Salem over two years ago. We were staying at the Traveler’s Bungalow in Chunchan Katte. The inspector also came with Chowda. They told us that Dodda Haida was spending the night with his wife in her house. Abboor is at a distance of about six miles from Chunchan Katte. I explained the situation to Rajaji and he was keen to join us. If we left for Abboor immediately, we would be there before sunrise and stood a good chance of intercepting Dodda Haida on his way to a hiding place somewhere in the woods by the river.</p>
		<p>It took us about three hours to cover the six miles to Abboor. It was well before sunrise, and we waited by the village near a narrow trail that led into the woods. We heard a noise and went behind a clump of bushes. I asked constable Gundappa to keep a close watch and identify the man when he came. Soon we saw the silhouette of a man wrapped in a blanket appear in the semi-darkness coming from the direction of the village. As he came near us, we saw he was a large man, walking briskly towards the woods. I stood up and shouted, “Stop, or I’ll shoot.”</p>
		<p>He immediately took off at a run, and disappeared into the forest. Gundappa shouted that he was our man. I fired my rifle twice, aiming for his legs, but in that light and with the heavy cover, it was virtually impossible to hit him. I must have missed him completely. We went after him, but it was a futile exercise. We came nowhere near catching him. It was a big disappointment for me.</p>
		<p>“Let us just go back,” said Rajaji with a smile. We’ll be in time for the morning coffee.”</p>
		<p>“Never mind,” he said on our way back. “Don’t take it too much to heart. You have done all you can. I am rather glad that you don’t have any blood on your hands!”</p>
		<p>Some months after this I made one more attempt to catch Dodda Haida. This was based on information I received about his movements.</p>
		<p>“Dodda Haida visits his house frequently,” a farmer from Abboor came and told me. “The whole village is behind him. His wife is against him because of his affair with the washerwoman. But she lives in mortal fear and dare not cross him. He has taken away some of her jewels and persuaded the Patel of the village to sell them for him. This has given him the money to buy anything he needs. This has made his wife furious. She is no angel of virtue herself. Dodda Haida is said to beat her and has even threatened to kill her. I think she will be happy to see him dead. Her life is in danger as long as he is alive.”</p>
		<p>The farmer was also of the opinion that it would be quite easy for the woman to keep us informed about her husband’s whereabouts. I believe the Patel said more or less the same thing to the inspector; he confirmed it when I asked him in confidence. I told the Patel that if he could hand over Dodda Haida to us, I would see to it that he would be given the reward advertised by the Government. He would also become famous.</p>
		<p>The Patel seemed quite embarrassed by my proposal and said there were some problems with that. First, he and Dodda Haida belonged to the same caste, and his fellow caste members would regard him as an outcaste if he betrayed one of his own. In addition – and this it seemed to me was the Patel’s real concern – people wrongly believed that he and Dodda Haida’s wife were having an illicit relationship. His getting rid of Dodda Haida by handing him over to the police would only confirm the rumor. He then went on to suggest that I ask her to see me and then ask her personally for help. I agreed to try.</p>
		<p>The Patel was to send for her. I was staying at Chunchan Katte, about six miles from Abboor. I felt it would be inconsiderate to make her walk the distance. I was also concerned that people, not knowing she was the murderer’s wife in a case I was investigating, might misinterpret her visit. So I rode down to Abboor and waited by a mango grove where the Patel met me. I had told him not to alarm her by giving out the reason why I wanted to see her, but she had probably guessed. It is not every day that a government official asks to meet a peasant woman. The Patel told me that Dodda Haida’s wife was on her way, and left me alone. A few minutes later I heard the jingle of silver anklets and toe rings worn by women in those days. I soon saw a tall, sturdy, rather good-looking woman of dusky complexion approaching me. I guessed her age to be from twenty-five to thirty. Her forehead was decked with stripes of white ash and a red dot suggesting she was a devout woman. She had obviously taken more care than usual to see me, the king’s official, wearing a newly washed sari and freshly made up. I felt a rush of pity well up within me to see this unfortunate woman taking such special pains to see me when all I was interested in was apprehending her husband.</p>
		<p>She came forward, saluted me with folded hands and said politely, but with a becoming shyness, “You sent for me, my lord?”</p>
		<p>“Aren’t you Dodda Haida’s wife?” I asked, returning her salute. Her expression hardened a little.</p>
		<p>“What if I am, sir?”</p>
		<p>“I hear he is not too well. Is it not true?” I asked her.</p>
		<p>It was a trick question – the kind that a lawyer habitually uses. Should she answer ‘yes’ or ‘no’, she would be giving away that she was seeing her husband. But this simple peasant woman didn’t fall for it. She answered my question with an artless question.</p>
		<p>“How should I know, my lord?”</p>
		<p>“I hear he comes to the village every now and then.”</p>
		<p>She said nothing, but I persisted.</p>
		<p>“They say he is seeing a washerwoman – and that he’s very cruel to you.”</p>
		<p>“Why should it concern you sir – what goes on between a husband and wife?” she said with some disdain. “Whether he keeps a washerwoman or a potter’s woman, what business is it of yours? Don’t all men do that?”</p>
		<p>Well, she had given all men including myself a dubious certificate in morality. I continued, “Please don’t be angry lady,” I said, trying to make the best of a bad situation. “Men will be men. But you are in grave danger from your husband. He might take it to his head to do just about anything. To a man like him, killing means nothing. He is going to be hanged some day, so he is as good as dead. He is as dangerous as a hungry tiger. If he hears any rumors about you, he will think nothing of killing you. Where another man might slap in anger, he will just as easily kill.”</p>
		<p>I faltered somewhat. I felt rather ashamed wondering if it was right for me to say such things to her about her own husband. Her face was livid with anger, and sweat streamed down her face. But considering how much was at stake, I felt I had to harden my heart and went on in the same vein.</p>
		<p>“You see, if you hand him over to us, you can be happy again and will also have done a great service to the community. Nobody need know that you were the one responsible. If you just let the Patel know when Dodda Haida comes into the village next, he will tell us and we will catch him. That is all you have to do. For your help, the Government will give you, in secret, the reward of a thousand rupees. If you want some land, it is yours for the asking.”</p>
		<p>The woman stood there listening to me with rising indignation. She drew herself up majestically, looking like the statue of Goddess Chamundi herself. She then spoke to me, looking me straight in the eye.</p>
		<p>“Sir! I am a just poor woman, and you may be rich and powerful. But that does not mean there is no justice or compassion in this world. You may be a big man in the Government, but to me you are just like anybody else. If a poor man running for his life came to you and begged you to save him, would you not save him? I am no different. Am I not also his wife? Haven’t I lived with him all these years? Is it right for you to ask me to do this? What if he beats me, or even if he kills me? I just can’t do what you ask. There is a power above all of us. I must be true to my duty and my values – my dharma.”</p>
		<p>Without waiting for an answer she turned her back on me and walked away. A little shaken by her spirited response, I mumbled feebly, “You are absolutely right lady! It is only women like you who have preserved our dharma.”</p>
		<p>I returned crestfallen. It was my last attempt to catch Dodda Haida. He was still loose when I was transferred to a different taluk.</p>
		<p>Unfortunately, her spirited defense was to have tragic consequences. Several months after I left the taluk, I heard that the inspector surrounded Dodda Haida’s house in an attempt to catch him but failed. He later went on to murder his wife, on the unfounded suspicion that she was co-operating with the police. Four years later, he was finally caught with the help of the washer man and his wife, brought to trial, and hanged. By then Dodda Haida must have lost interest in life. I was then working in the secretariat in Bangalore. The judge who sentenced Dodda Haida wired to the Government, “Glad to report Dodda Haida was hanged.”</p>
		<p>This disgusted Mr. H.V. Nanjundaiah, then the Secretary of the Justice Department.</p>
		<p>“Glad indeed, to hang a man!” he said to me with a grimace. “One would think a son had been born. I suppose this call for distributing sweets!”</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
