<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>THE VANISHED RAJ</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-012">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">12 </span>REVENUE ADMINISTRATION</h1>
		<p><strong><em>Jamabandi or revenue settlement. A surveyor’s nightmare. Easy solution to a hard problem. Dafedar Raza Husain. Dispute between village accountants. </em></strong></p>
		<p>The annual revenue collection and settlement of accounts were the two most important functions that the Amildar had to perform. An Amildar’s record for future considerations and promotion depended to a large extent on his performance in revenue matters. The official term for this was jamabandi. The jamabandis were always carried out at two levels. The first, known as dittam jamabandi was an accounting done at the level of each village. This was followed by consolidation of these accounts into a financial statement for the whole taluk. This was called the huzoor jamabandi. This consolidated account had to be approved by the subdivision officer (SDO) in person. Only then was the huzoor jamabandi official. This was the only area where the Amildar was in any way subordinate to the subdivision officer. But even here, the SDO could not afford to be uncooperative. The alternative was for the SDO himself to prepare the accounts – an impossibility.</p>
		<p>People working today can have little idea of the challenges posed by such work in those days, when every minute calculation had to be done by hand, mostly by the Amildar himself. We had to examine the accounts in every village, for every survey number or land record, work out the difference between the current revenue and that of the previous year, and then prepare estimates for the following year. We then had to do a similar calculation for non-farm revenues from such sources as grazing fees, income from the sale of timber from government lands, fines collected for unauthorized water use, penalties for violation of revenue code and other miscellaneous items. In the case of death of landowners the transfer of titles to the heirs was also considered part of jamabandi. The Amildar had to do most of this work himself, assisted by a few clerks.</p>
		<p>This village level work was the dittam jamabandi. It was really a year-round affair that fed into the huzoor jamabandi. The huzoor jamabandi was officially complete only when the DC or the SDO signed the records. If a proper job had been done at the dittam level, the huzoor work could be carried out in a couple of days or a week at the most. I cannot recall ever finishing a dittam jamabandi in less than three weeks. Actually it was a year-round chore; only the final consolidation of accounts and the preparation of the financial statements would take three weeks or more.</p>
		<p>From this description it should be clear that the jamabandi took a good deal of an Amildar’s time. But I introduced an innovation. Whenever I visited any village for work connected with the jamabandi, I would review other papers also – often on completely unrelated matters – and put them in order. At every village that I visited, I would summon the local leaders, get to know them, and find the details of how their village worked. I had a completely free hand in all this work, and was allowed to use my own discretion in deciding and handling any situation that arose. This greatly enhanced my popularity with the people.</p>
		<p>Essentially, my method involved studying all the problems of the village in question before visiting it, rather than travel from village to village focusing on a particular problem or function. So the focus shifted from the function to the village. My superiors saw and appreciated its merit; it streamlined operations, and it was also popular with the people. It began to be copied in other taluks also, and soon became the standard operating practice throughout the state.</p>
		<p>For my work routine, I would set out for the village in question at seven in the morning, either by foot or on horseback, depending on the distance I had to travel. I would stop by any trouble spots where some issue or the other needed my attention, talk to the farmers, and then head for the place where the village account review would take place. There I would meet the village elders and review the finances and settle the accounts in preparation for the jamabandi. As I mentioned earlier, other matters relating to the village administration would also be brought to my attention and discussed. I would then head back to the camp around noon and rest for a couple of hours. We would return to work about three in the afternoon and go on continuously until about nine, long after nightfall, and return for a late dinner. At the same time, I wouldn’t exactly starve between meals; at every village I visited I would be offered coconut juice, fruits, or milk. I always made it a point never to refuse these offerings, or otherwise the villagers would take offense.</p>
		<p>Both jamabandis were momentous affairs in the annual life of a taluk, and invariably took on the aspects of a festival. At each camp, at least a hundred village servants and farmers would gather to meet with the Amildar and discuss their affairs with him. Neighboring villages would also send gifts of rations, milk, butter, vegetables, and fruits for the participants.</p>
		<p>It was the practice in our country those days for anyone visiting a village to be invited to stay for lunch. It was a very old tradition and a point of honor with each village to offer hospitality to visitors, especially government officials. If the visitor’s caste would not allow him to accept the invitation, he would be given the necessary provisions and the use of a kitchen to cook his (or his family’s) meal. It was also a necessity since most villages in those days had no public eating places like restaurants.</p>
		<p>At the huzoor jamabandi, the Amildar would rapidly summarise the financial statement of each village for the superior officer – the DC or the SDO – whoever happened to be present. In case of any dispute over a particular account, the Amildar would explain the salient points and the officer in charge would make a ruling. I always did my best to carry out the jamabandi exactly as specified in government procedures, but in one respect I was not successful. This related to determining the official boundary of each property as required by government procedures, a task that I found impossible. When dealing with wet or irrigated land, in which valuable cash crops like rice or sugarcane are grown, it can safely be assumed that the area being cultivated by a farmer belongs to him. Any boundary then becomes quite unnecessary. Besides, any boundary mark is sure to be washed away by the canal water. Even in dry lands, i.e., lands watered by rainfall only, for revenue purposes, there is no harm in assuming that the cultivated part belongs to the farmer who is doing the cultivating. Any other kind of boundary is useless, and it is pointless to put up any boundary stones or other markers. When there is a dispute, a survey team can be called in to determine the boundary from the map. This is eminently practical.</p>
		<p>Government rules, however, required the taluk authorities to constantly update the boundaries by replacing all damaged or missing boundary markers called boundary stones. This called for locating the boundary on the official map, then matching the boundary on the ground to the map, and then installing the necessary markers with the help of a team of surveyors.</p>
		<p>This is impossible in practice. If a village has five hundred survey numbers in its account, with four boundaries and six stones for each, it means five thousand items per village. Even if ten percent of these should need attention, five hundred have to be repaired at the time of recording the yield. Thus, for a taluk like Yedatore with two hundred villages, a hundred thousand missing items would need to be located and established. There are not enough surveyors in the world perhaps to finish it in the time allotted for the job. This brings me to a rather amusing episode, which took place the first time I was engaged in jamabandi duty when I tried to go exactly by government procedures.</p>
		<p>This was during my first huzoor jamabandi as Amildar. In my first session lasting from seven in the morning till noon, I was able to inspect exactly eight survey numbers. To my horror I found that not one of them had any clearly delineated boundaries or boundary stones (markers). Even the owners couldn’t remember ever having seen any, and often didn’t know where exactly they were supposed to be. I was very discouraged and thought I might have to devote the rest of my life to put things in order for the whole taluk. The officer in charge of the huzoor jamabandi was my senior friend Mr. A.S. Iyer who was in charge of the survey team. He knew the revenue law very well and was reputed to be a man of great probity and dedication. I explained my problem to him. He just gave me a knowing smile and said, “Mr. Rama Rao! It has its own method. I mean, there is only one way it can be done. I got to learn it during survey training. I’ll show it to you tomorrow morning.”</p>
		<p>I had tried every kind of magic trick I knew with little progress to show for it. In my present situation, I was prepared try anything and decided to go along with him.</p>
		<p>“I’ll be happy to try whatever you suggest,” I told him. “But how on earth are we ever going to locate so many boundary stones, let alone inspect and fix them?”</p>
		<p>“Never mind!” he said. Just get fifteen or twenty farmers with flags. Don’t be alarmed. I don’t mean the official state flag.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-012-01">1 </a></sup>Just some sticks with rags tied to their tops.”</p>
		<p>The following morning we went to the village of Mirley. We had in our party Dafedar Raza Hussain, a veteran police officer of the Mirley police outpost. The young farmers of the village thought it was a lot of fun, and we had many more flag-carriers than we had originally asked for. There were actually more than fifty of them. They stood there, arrayed in a crescent, straining to go, looking for all the world like village braves of heraldic yore, ready to go on their cattle raids. Or as Lord Krishna said to Partha (Arjuna) before the great Mahabharata battle.</p>
		<p>O Partha! Behold the Kurus assembled!</p>
		<p>Then our Muslim colleague wanted to know how we were going to find and repair the boundaries when they didn’t exist in the first place. The SDO smiled and said that we didn’t have the time to worry about such niceties and the work must somehow go on. Then he gave instructions to the village braves to go find as many boundary stones as possible. Our army scattered helter-skelter, not exactly knowing what they were looking for.</p>
		<p>The Dafedar Sahib called out to a flag carrier, “Hey Siddey Gowda! There must be a stone on the spot where you are standing.”</p>
		<p>“Look for it,” shouted the Shekdar in Kannada.</p>
		<p>“Dekh re!” said Raza Hussain in Hindi.</p>
		<p>“Not a stone in sight,” retorted Siddey Gowda.</p>
		<p>This combination of comic opera and Chinese fire drill went on until noon. The flags prowled aimlessly looking, of all things, like the caucus race in Alice in Wonderland. In the four hours we had been at it, we had covered just four survey numbers. All we had done in these four hours was to establish that there were no boundary markers for these four properties. I was getting discouraged, but my SDO seemed entirely unconcerned.</p>
		<p>“The problem will soon sort itself out in time,” he said.</p>
		<p>I soon began to appreciate what he meant. As the afternoon sun started bearing down on the flag-carriers, the Goddess of Mirley took mercy on us and our fortunes began to improve. As the afternoon heat rose, our people were beginning to see stones everywhere, stones that had been invisible in the cool of the morning. From the cool shade of an umbrella under a cooler tree, our Dafedar would ask, “Do you see a stone there Madey Gowda?”</p>
		<p>“Yes sir!” Madey Gowda would answer.</p>
		<p>“Dekho! Raza Hussain,” the Amildar would call out to the Dafedar in Hindi.</p>
		<p>“Ji, huzoor”, would be the response.</p>
		<p>Our task, which had looked impossible in the cool of the morning, became easier as the afternoon sun grew hotter. This is what I call civilized behavior. Or perhaps the Sun God took mercy on us and rewarded us for our diligence.</p>
		<p>But I was still doubtful if such good fortune had really fallen on us and asked Raza Hussain in Hindi, “All these stones – are they really here? We couldn’t find any of them in the morning.”</p>
		<p>“Of course they are, my lord!” he replied.</p>
		<p>I then went over to where he was standing and asked, “Where are all the stones?”</p>
		<p>“Everywhere sir,” he said to me with a perfectly straight face. “There is nothing but stones here. What else are you going to find in this bekar zamin (wretched land)?”</p>
		<p>“Accha, tum bahut hoshiar admi ho.”</p>
		<p>“All right!” I said. “You are a very clever fellow.”</p>
		<p>I returned to the cool shade of my tree thankful that we had such a resourceful officer working for us. The boundary stone deities made themselves visible to their devotees in great profusion – their frequency increasing with the intensity of the afternoon sun. Finally, it was time for a late afternoon lunch. As we sat down, we felt a sense of accomplishment that a good day’s work had been done.</p>
		<p>“You see Mr. Rama Rao, all it takes is a system and method,” said the SDO. “If you have a method, even difficult tasks are made easy. We have inspected something like a thousand boundary stones haven’t we?”</p>
		<p>“There seemed to be more madness than method in what we did,” I replied, “and experience seemed to be the main thing.”</p>
		<p>It was our good fortune that our Dafedar Raza Hussain was a very experienced man. But not everything relating to revenue settlement was like this, mostly it was serious business. Yedatore had the reputation of being a troublesome taluk. My DC Sparkes, had warned me: “Difficult taluk, turbulent people, dishonest village servants, heavy arrears.” At first I did not quite understand what he meant, but soon began to see some of the problems he was referring to. One of them came about as follows.</p>
		<p>After my first jamabandi, I was camping in Mirley for about a week to settle some accounts that were in arrears. The regular Shanbog had been suspended for some irregularities, and a new clerk by name Nanjappa had been put in charge shortly before my visit. This Nanjappa was a clever fellow but a newcomer. The suspended Shanbog, whose name was Subbiah, if I remember right, was not particularly bright but a local man. The office of the Shanbog was hereditary, and Subbiah’s family had held it for several generations before his removal from office. Such removal from hereditary offices like Patel and Shanbog were done only under exceptional circumstances involving serious irregularity or crime. Understandably, he and the new Shanbog, Nanjappa were sworn enemies. As a result, there were two factions in Mirley. This was the situation when I visited the place.</p>
		<p>I made a list of the survey numbers in arrears and sent for the owners. No one came. Then I sent some of my men to bring them, but they still failed to show up. So I sent some taluk office servants to the fields, instructing them to shut off the water supply by closing the sluices. The farmers first tried to browbeat the servants to make them open the sluice gates. When it didn’t work, they tried to bribe them. This was a violation for which I imposed stiff fines on the owners and had warrants served on them. I then made the whole village accountable by ordering that the delinquent owners should be brought before me, failing which the arrears would be collected from the village budget. This finally brought them around.</p>
		<p>The farmers showed up one by one. Some of them paid up; some promised to pay and requested an extension. A few claimed that they had paid the Shanbog and showed me the receipts. These had to be investigated on a case-by-case basis. So I called a meeting of all the owners who claimed to have paid. I asked the old Shanbog Subbiah, the new Shanbog Nanjappa and other village officials including the Patel to be present at the meeting. The hearing in my court would go something like this— two farmers led by Kempe Gowda, son of Ramey Gowda, would appear, walking in a slouch.</p>
		<p>My orderly would tell Kempe Gowda, “Walk straight, approach, and present your case to his lordship.” Kempe Gowda would stand at attention. I would then ask, “Mr. Nanjappa, how much does the land held by Kempe Gowda’s family have to pay?”</p>
		<p>Shanbog Nanjappa would reply something like, “It is Rs. 117 plus interest arrears for three years, including Rs. 39 for the current year.”</p>
		<p>Kempe Gowda: “Did I ever say I wouldn’t pay for the current year? But what arrears are you talking about, Shanbog? I don’t remember any.”</p>
		<p>Nanjappa: “Last year and the year before – according to my records.”</p>
		<p>Kempe Gowda: “I have paid them. Here are the receipts.”</p>
		<p>Nanjappa, the new Shanbog (handing the receipts to the Amildar): “These receipts seem to be in order, my lord. But the Government hasn’t received the money. That means whoever took the money has not remitted it to the Government.”</p>
		<p>Amildar: “The receipts have been signed by Shanbog Subbiah. Mr. Kempe Gowda, whom did you give the money to?”</p>
		<p>Kempe Gowda: “Who else my lord? Shanbog Subbiah.”</p>
		<p>Amildar: “Well, Mr. Subbiah, did you give him this receipt?”</p>
		<p>Subbiah: “How can I say my lord, unless I examine it. Let me take a look.” Subbiah studies the receipt and turns to the Amildar. “My lord! This is certainly not in my hand. You must permit me to ask Mr. Kempe Gowda a few questions.”</p>
		<p>Permission was granted.</p>
		<p>Subbiah: “Mr. Kempe Gowda! Your family is highly honorable. Your father Ramey Gowda is a god-like person. Tell me the truth. Did you give me the money?”</p>
		<p>Kempe Gowda: “Didn’t you take it from me Shanbog? As truly as you are sitting here holding the receipts.”</p>
		<p>Subbiah: “Speak the truth. Did not Nanjappa here forge my name to the receipt and promise you that he would get your revenue waived if you testified that it was my signature? Just to discredit me?”</p>
		<p>Nanjappa: “Listen to that dirty dog bark sir – telling lies about me”.</p>
		<p>Amildar: “You cannot use such language in our presence. You are free to say whatever you want, but you must use proper language.”</p>
		<p>Recriminations were flying thick and fast. We were getting nowhere. Finally, I made the following ruling:</p>
		<p>The revenue payment must be made to the Patel, not the Shanbog. Both the Patel and the Shanbog must sign the receipt— the Patel certifying that revenue has been received, and the Shanbog certifying the amount to be correct. Receipts carrying only the Shanbog’s signature were invalid if there was no record of payment with the Government. The farmer or the family in question could sue Shanbog Subbiah and recover monies paid, but the arrears must be cleared.</p>
		<p>Some villages had illiterate Patels who held their office as a hereditary right. So it was common practice for the owners to transact all their business with the Shanbogs. I was not entirely happy with my own ruling, but something had to be done to bring order to the revenue situation. Several cases were filed against the deposed Shanbog Subbiah, but they fell through for lack of evidence. At least the revenue situation in villages like Mirley improved. Things became more regular.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
