<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>THE VANISHED RAJ</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-013">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">13 </span> CORRUPT PRACTICES</h1>
		<p><strong><em>A cook’s solution to a good retirement. Tributes and honors of high office. Advice from a senior well-wisher. A clever scheme backfires. Offers of bribe and assistance. </em></strong></p>
		<p>The kind of personal administration we had in those days, with a good deal of direct and informal contact between officials and the subjects of the realm may have been a fertile ground for unscrupulous officials to enrich themselves. In any case, when I was a boy growing up, tales of corruption and bribes among old-time officials were a common topic of conversation. A friendly exchange might go something like this.</p>
		<p>“What is his income?”</p>
		<p>“Fifty rupees a month,” or a hundred or some such number.</p>
		<p>“Side income?”</p>
		<p>A sum typically two or three times the regular income would be mentioned. This of course would depend on the power, influence, and the ethics of the office-holder. To some people, the ability of an official to coax extra income from his office was an object of admiration and even awe. Statements such as the following were part of the folklore.</p>
		<p>“Indeed, what generosity! Feeds himself and feeds everyone around him.”</p>
		<p>“What gentleness and fine discrimination! He always feasts arranging weddings, never a funeral.”</p>
		<p>“A fellow who can’t even feed himself. How can he hope to feed others?”</p>
		<p>“What a position! Could have feasted on it and fed a dozen others.</p>
		<p>Instead, that impotent fool – he was like a eunuch in a harem.” <sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-013-01">1 </a></sup></p>
		<p>Such comments expressing admiration and ridicule were commonplace in my youth. When I joined the service, there were a few old-time Amildars left over from those days who did not think twice about using their position to improve their personal finances. I knew one of them personally – an elderly gentleman who had been a cook in the household of a former Diwan.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-013-02">2 </a></sup>He had pleased the old Diwan greatly with his culinary skills, for which he had been rewarded with appointment to an Amildar’s position. He was quite old by then, nearing retirement age. With a great deal of effort, and with strong recommendations from the Diwan himself, he had managed to secure six months’ extension of service. During his taluk’s annual revenue settlement (huzoor jamabandi), the last one he would be holding as Amildar, he requested all the village servants and town elders to assemble prior to the formal accounts review. He addressed them as follows:</p>
		<p>“My dear friends! I have served the people of the state for more than thirty years [mostly as cook] and now it is time for me to take your leave and retire. In all these years of service, I have tried my best only to help people, and have never consciously done an injury to a single soul. [He was an excellent cook.] I am a man with a large family – with children and grandchildren to educate and daughters to marry off. You should remember me – I need your help now. Please don’t forget that this is my last jamabandi as your Amildar. I retire in a month. In addition to the usual revenue payments to the Government, I request from each village a personal contribution to me, in keeping with the size and status of your village.”</p>
		<p>It is possible that having been a cook (and server) most of his life, and used to being tipped for his services, he simply carried over the practice into his new job. But our people those days were simple and unsophisticated, and easily moved by such appeals. The audience was touched.</p>
		<p>“What he says – it was fair and proper!” said one of them to me, recalling the episode with tears in eyes. “Our Subedar – what a gentle, saintly, man he was! What humility! Not a hint of false pride.”</p>
		<p>The result apparently was highly satisfactory. I heard this story from one of the men actually present at the meeting. I later got to know this Amildar – he was retired and by then had acquired a look of serenity and peace. He confirmed the story and gave me the following advice.</p>
		<p>“You are still very young – of an age when you believe that rules and procedures are like gospel to be followed at all times. Why do people like us slave in service? Is it for the greater glory of the Government? Or is it because it is a pathway to heaven? Hardly! Every small thing we do has just one goal – keeping our stomachs filled.”</p>
		<p>Well, there it was! His philosophy in a nutshell – it was obviously a case of taking the cook out of the kitchen, but not the kitchen out of the cook. Anyway, he continued expounding his philosophy.</p>
		<p>“But in filling our own stomachs,” he went on, “we must never do others any harm. That is the essence of justice. Also, if you have accumulated some money by the time you retire, then you can afford to do good things and serve society. You can be generous towards good causes – temples, hospitals, schools – anything you want. Your children, your relatives; why the whole world will respect you. But if you have no money, once you are out of power you may just as well be a dead man, a corpse.”</p>
		<p>He certainly could not be accused of failing to follow his own precept, in both regards – filling stomachs and accumulating wealth. While it is easy enough to laugh at such banalities, every government official in those days had to resolve a dilemma – where to draw the line? With the kind of personalized rule we embodied as the Maharaja’s direct representatives, presentation of tributes and offerings had a tradition and history going back centuries that could not be overturned overnight. Added to this was the fact that travel conditions were primitive, with hardly any hotels or restaurants, no electricity and no refrigerators for storage. All this made us dependent on the villagers for basic amenities. So, many of these ancient practices like presentation of food and supplies had grown out of practical necessity. To get an idea of what all was involved, consider the following.</p>
		<p>Perishable items like milk and butter could not be stored, which meant they had to be acquired fresh in every village where the Amildar’s party camped. It also meant that food had to be cooked each day, for which firewood had to be procured. Whenever I went on a tour of villages, my party usually consisted of about a dozen people including my cook and his assistant. All these men had to be fed. In any village, the number of people to be entertained could easily swell to double the size of my own party, with the Patel, the Shanbog and other village notables often joining us for lunch. I always carried enough provisions for my party and myself, and acquired the rest of the supplies – fresh produce, firewood, and fodder for my horse and the oxen at the village.</p>
		<p>At first, I tried to pay for these – they were quite inexpensive those days. The result was, though the money certainly left my hands, it never seemed to reach the actual suppliers; generally we didn’t even know who the suppliers were. Either the Shekdar or the village Patel’s servants would deliver the supplies to my cook or his assistant. I then stopped paying for them. This was a practice that went back to times immemorial.</p>
		<p>By this I thought I had arrived at a satisfactory compromise – respecting tradition, while at the same time bearing the greater portion of the expenses myself. Nevertheless, my conduct was considered severe for those days. When I was in Mysore for some work, I went to see one of the Councilors who happened to be visiting Mysore at the same time.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-013-03">3 </a></sup>He had served as assistant commissioner, deputy commissioner, and in other responsible positions with distinction, and now just before retirement had risen to the office of Councilor, a position next only to the Diwan. He was an official of the old school – a fine gentleman and a family friend.</p>
		<p>During the course of our conversation he said to me, “I have heard a great deal about you – that you are a very able and honest man, which, of course, I am happy to learn. I also believe that you are a person who is destined to occupy high positions and serve the Maharaja and our people with distinction. So, please do not feel offended by what I am about to tell you. Honesty should not be stretched to the point of absurdity. It is also wrong to assume that you alone are honest and those before you were all dishonest. There are some tributes offered in honor of the office you hold and not to you personally – offerings of fruits, flowers, transportation, and other such things when you are camping – turning these back is just bad manners; also it is something that can reflect poorly on one’s future prospects. Such trivia is not something that can ever rise to the level of honesty or truth. An honest and sensible man will have no difficulty in deciding what is right and what is wrong. But one shouldn’t be laughed at as an oddity, and one shouldn’t compromise the dignity of one’s office by dispensing with customary tributes of respect.”</p>
		<p>I have ever since regarded this advice as my guiding principle. For years I couldn’t comprehend how anyone could be so craven as to demand a bribe, or how a man would be brazen enough to offer one. Then one day, I heard a veteran clerk in my office mention a wealthy, highly respected man by name, and remark how this man, though more than ordinarily tightfisted, gave a thousand rupees to the police just to avoid falling under suspicion. I took this to mean that people who find themselves in difficult positions will take the initiative to bribe officials. The moral I drew from this was that such people can be an especially bad influence on young officials who should be on guard. Sometime later this was confirmed for me in a dramatic episode that I will next relate.</p>
		<p>In the eastern extremity of Yedatore taluk are several villages where land holdings were in the form of inams or large estates.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-013-04">4 </a></sup>In one of these villages there were a dozen or so such estates owned by wealthy Brahmins. These estates were generally too large to be cultivated by the owners themselves. As a result, each owner typically worked only a small part of his land, leasing the rest to tenant farmers who were required to remit to the owners a part of the annual yield and the tax. This was an arrangement that had been in force through several generations of owners and cultivators.</p>
		<p>Some recent irrigation works in the area that drew water from the Kaveri river canal had made these lands extremely valuable. In fact, the new irrigation works had more than doubled their value. The owners tried to increase their share of the yield also, but the cultivators refused. The owners then tried evicting the farmers, but the latter contended that the only right the owners had was for a share of the crop and the farmers had a hereditary right to farm the land in perpetuity – something like squatters rights – which they claimed on the basis of history and tradition. This was a nice legal point that could only be decided in the courts.</p>
		<p>The owners, however, had strong reasons for not taking their cases to court; they were sure to be lengthy and expensive, and the outcome was by no means certain. Then some astute lawyers came up with a scheme to help the owners evict the cultivators. The scheme was based on the fact that all the records were in the inam-owners’ names; the cultivators had no direct dealings whatsoever with the Government. They simply paid the owners the contracted amounts including their share of the taxes, and the owners paid the taxes to the Government. Thus, the land survey numbers (or land ownership records) and the tax receipts were issued in the owners’ names. The lawyer’s strategy was to keep collecting rent from the tenant farmers, but withhold tax payments to the Government. The Government would then auction off tax delinquent lands. These would then be bought by the owners and their friends by coming up with the high bids. The farmers with their limited cash reserves would be unable to match these wealthy parties.</p>
		<p>In effect the inam-owners would form a cartel and trade ownerships in the auction. The resulting change of ownership records would nullify all previous contracts between the owners and the tenant farmers. Fresh contracts, much more favorable to the owners, could then be drawn up.</p>
		<p>This was certainly a clever legalistic tour de force. It was put into practice by selecting a few very valuable tracts that had been leased to farmers thought to be leaders of their party and troublemakers. By the time I became Amildar, this game had been going on for several years and the lands were heavily in arrears. These were extremely valuable pieces of property with unpaid taxes running into thousands of rupees.</p>
		<p>Finally, the day of the auction was announced. The case was considered sufficiently serious for the subdivision officer (SDO) himself to be put in charge of the auction. I was also there to assist him with the records and other local details.</p>
		<p>The auction began in the village square. It would begin with one of my assistants, the Shekdar announcing,</p>
		<table>
			<tr>
				<td>Item one </td>
				<td>Owner Mr. Shastri </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Survey number xxx </td>
				<td>Taxes owed: 500 rupees </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>3.25 acres </td>
				<td>Government bid: 1000 rupees </td>
			</tr>
		</table>
		<p>This was only a nominal bid, intended to open the proceedings. Serious bidding would start after this opening bid by the Government, and would go on until it was sold to the highest bidder. This was the usual practice.</p>
		<p>But this time, as soon as the Government made its initial bid, a farmer stepped forward and said: “But sir, that survey number belongs to the land being cultivated by me. My father, his grandfather, and many others before them have worked this land for generations. I have promptly paid taxes to the owners to be remitted to the Government. Here, I have statements showing separate payments – to the owner for his share of the yield, and taxes to be paid to the Government. But the owner has failed to pay the Government. So, if you want to recover back taxes owed by Mr. Shastri, auction the land he has kept for his own cultivation. Don’t punish us for his failure. We have paid our dues.”</p>
		<p>Shastri, the owner, turned a little pale and said, “He is just a tenant farmer. What has he to do with the Government? As the owner of record for that survey number, I’m willing to let it come to auction.”</p>
		<p>This completely changed the complexion of the auction and led to heated arguments. It was obvious that the farmers were no fools and had the advice of competent lawyers who had seen through the game. On the side of the owners were many wealthy people who had travelled from places like Bangalore, Mysore, and Hasan. On the farmers’ side there were relatives, friends, advisors, and elected representatives from the state assembly. With the stakes so high, the parties began to shout at each other and the meeting soon degenerated into a rabble.</p>
		<p>Repeated efforts by the SDO failed to bring it under control. In disgust he turned to me and said, “Mr. Rama Rao, it doesn’t look like we can go on with the auction today. Why don’t you take charge of the meeting? Look at the accounts and settle the dispute. We can restart the auction later.”</p>
		<p>I turned to the noisy crowd, drew their attention by having my trumpeter blow several blasts, and told them very firmly to sit down and shut up. When this was done, I instructed them to send us two representatives – one from each party. I suggested that these could be elected by the two parties – the owners and the cultivators. They were to represent their cases to the SDO and me. We would hear their arguments and the SDO would rule on them. As emotions were running high, I issued a stiff warning that anyone disturbing the peace would be sent into police custody. This restored order and the two representatives came forward and joined us. We then questioned them closely and examined the records. The whole thing was quite s i m p l e and boiled down to the following facts:</p>
		<ol>
			<li>1 All the survey numbers in the village showed these Brahmins as the owners of record; and these included the survey numbers with tax arrears.</li>
			<li>Each owner of record has several survey numbers in his holdings. Some of these are leased to cultivators and the rest are retained for their own cultivation. But here was the sticker that gave away the game: all of the tax delinquencies are on the survey numbers leased to the cultivators – never on their own. </li>
			<li>The farmers had been working the land for several generations and their taxes had always been paid to the owners who submitted them to the Government. They had continued the practice, except that the owners, in the last several years, had withheld all tax payments coming from the cultivators’ share – but not their own holdings. </li>
		</ol>
		<p>So the whole scheme became easy to unravel. The owners had deliberately withheld taxes on leased lands to force them into auction. When we questioned, they came up with some lame excuses for this strange state of affairs. The owners’ dispute with their tenants was something for the courts to decide. The SDO and I were both furious at their efforts to manipulate the Government into doing their dirty work. We dismissed the two representatives, and after a brief secret conference came up with the following ruling:</p>
		<p>The lands (survey numbers) on record that owed taxes would be brought up for auction. If the tenant farmer of that survey number could produce records showing that his share of the taxes paid to the owner of record were not in arrears, the auction of that land would be set aside and the next one taken up, and so on. To collect back taxes, the survey numbers held by delinquent owners for their own cultivation would be brought to auction. Our argument was that it was not the land that failed to pay the tax but its owner, even after the cultivator had paid his due share. This meant the owner had not only failed to pay his part, but had actually appropriated amounts which the cultivator had given as his share of the tax. So there was no violation on the cultivator’s part and punishing him would be unfair. If the amount realized after auctioning these lands proved insufficient to erase the arrears, we would then return to the earlier deferred survey numbers and bring them also to the auction block.</p>
		<p>I took some time to explain our ruling in great detail. When it dawned on the owners that their entire plot had exploded in their faces, they were thunderstruck. One of them, trembling with anger said to me, “You are dead set against the law,” he shouted. “You are overturning everything our previous rulers did for us.”</p>
		<p>“Watch what you are saying!” I warned him. “If you exceed the bounds of proper behavior, you will be severely penalized.”</p>
		<p>Anyway we began the auction by calling a couple of survey numbers. As the cultivators produced the receipts, we deferred their auction and went to the next one. The owners sat in a funk.</p>
		<p>After a short while, I had to leave the assembly to go into the woods not far from the town square to relieve myself. As I came out I saw a man, one of the owners’ party, standing there waiting for me. He bowed to me with folded hands and said, “Brahmin my lord, a fellow Brahmin!” he appealed to me with folded hands. “If the auction goes on like this, we will all be ruined. You must save us – Brahmins like yourself.”</p>
		<p>Then from within the folds of his shawl, he pulled out a stack of bank notes, a large sum in denomination of hundred rupees. He drew some three or four notes from the stack and offered them to me. I drew back in anger. I felt insulted, especially by his appeal to my caste, with its implication that I, a government servant, could be made to place my caste above the king’s law and justice. I have always been somewhat impulsive and quick to anger, and I reacted by giving him a couple of hard slaps, without reflecting that I was striking a much older man.</p>
		<p>When I returned to the auction, that Brahmin was no longer there. By nightfall, not a single survey number had been auctioned. The owners came to an agreement with the Government and willingly paid their back taxes and the penalty. A few of them requested an extension and eventually paid up in full.</p>
		<p>This is the only experience I ever had in my years of service where the offer was so blatant. But there were other occasions when hints were dropped or suggestions made to influence a decision in favor of one or other party. There were also instances where even some friend or well wisher suggested methods that would have enriched me by means that were on the borderline – not illegal perhaps, but questionable. I will relate one such instance, which happened to me when I was still Amildar of Yedatore.</p>
		<p>A wealthy family friend of mine submitted an application requesting permission to buy some government land that had once been in use for public grazing, but was now lying unused. There was a little marginal farming done by a few tenant farmers who paid the Government a nominal fee. It is not clear to me now what plans the Government had for that land. Though not then in use, the location of the land and the composition of the soil indicated that these lands might some day become extremely valuable if some canal irrigation works were to be carried out. This was precisely what my rich friend had in mind also. He was quite open about it.</p>
		<p>“Sir, some day this land will become very valuable,” he said to me. “But developing it will require a good deal of capital, which I am prepared to put up. There is no hurry whatsoever. Once you are moved to a different taluk – or promoted to a higher post, I will transfer half the land to you. I’ll also take the responsibility for obtaining agreements from the tenant farmers. No hint of suspicion will fall on you. There is also no violation of law. It is simply a good investment based on forethought. You can be a beneficiary by helping me.”</p>
		<p>I have to confess I was greatly tempted. I have always been attracted to land and agriculture, and it was my fond wish that I might some day retire to the life of a gentleman farmer, following in the footsteps of my forefathers. But not being wealthy like my ancestors my wish seemed no more than a dream.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-013-05">5 </a></sup>And here was a chance for me to realize that dream. The person making the offer was not some greedy stranger, but a family friend who had my welfare at heart. But God gave me the strength to resist the temptation, allowing me to live with a clear conscience.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
