<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>THE VANISHED RAJ</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-001">
<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">18 THE FALL OF DEVARSAY GOWDA </h1>
<p><strong><em>A murder and riot case in a neighboring taluk. Bureaucratic turf battles. The misfortunes of Patel Devarsay Gowda. </em></strong></p>
<p>As my term as Yedatore Amildar was coming to a close, I was drawn into the investigation of a riot and murder case at a place called Bidirakka, situated just outside my taluk boundary. Bidirakka was in the neighboring Holey Narsipur taluk in the adjoining Hassan district; Yedatore was in Mysore district. Thus, the scene of the crime was outside the charge of my taluk as well as my district, though it was only about eight miles from Saligrama. In a tragedy of epic proportions, it brought about the downfall of its great Patel Devarsay Gowda. Here is how it came about.</p>
<p>One day, late in 1907, I was camping in Saligrama when my orderly Sheikh Mohaddin came running to me and said, “My lord, Shamba the Vagabond has received several tulwar wounds. He is in lying in very serious condition in the town gymnasium. He may be close to death.”</p>
<p>Tulwar is a heavy curved sword or scimitar, a weapon of war in days gone by, but now they are little more than museum pieces and collector’s items. So receiving a tulwar wound is no ordinary feat; one must have done something out of the ordinary to merit it. For me though, it meant a major new case, especially if the victim were to die of his wounds. Little did I know how much more serious the case would prove to be.</p>
<p>As soon as I got the report, I took the doctor from the local fund dispensary and went to the gym. Gyms those days were quite primitive; equipped with weights, clubs, and other simple implements. Their main function was to serve as a place to train wrestlers. The town gym was on the same street as Patel Devarsay Gowda’s house. We tried to be as inconspicuous as possible, but by the time we reached the gym a good</span>sized crowd had already collected. In those days it was virtually impossible to keep the Amildar’s movements secret. On this occasion, in particular, persons connected with the crime must have been watching my every move.</p>
<p>Upon reaching the gym, we found the place locked. Not one of its instructors or students was anywhere to be seen. I sent for the chief instructor who also ran the gym, but he had made himself scarce. I sent for the Patel, but he too was evasive, sending back word that he was not home. Some discreet inquiries yielded the information that the place had been open just fifteen minutes prior to our arrival. I then collected a group of town elders as witnesses, got a warrant prepared, and made preparations to break the lock and force our entry. As we were about to break the lock, one of the junior instructors came running and let us in with the key. He told me that his chief had gone to work on his farm, placing him in charge.</p>
<p>To anyone who has seen a turn of the century Indian gym, my description is bound to sound bland. The interior was dark, the air dank with the combined odor of sweat and oil, a sense heightened by the absence of windows. The whole place was approximately fifteen-feet wide and thirty-five feet long, with nearly a third of it taken up by the akhada – nothing but a pit filled with soft red mud. The remainder of the place was filled with heavy clubs, stone weights, chains, and other implements used for exercises in those days. In one corner of the gym was a smooth granite pillar about eight inches in diameter and seven feet tall. This is a particularly challenging exercise – to climb this pole, dragging oneself up with just the arm muscles.</p>
<p>The gym had no lights. I had a police lantern brought in and looked around for any signs of the victim. The dim light thrown by the lantern revealed the outline of what seemed like a bundle of clothes lying on the ground, in the same corner as the granite pillar. On approaching it, we found it to be the body of an inert man. I had two more lanterns brought in and asked the doctor to examine it. Covered with blood-soaked sheets was the still breathing body of a large-sized, heavily-built man, known locally as Shamba the Vagabond. His shirt, drenched in blood, had caked and stuck to the wounds. He had also received a blow to the head, which had been dressed with powdered charcoal or some such country preparation. He was lying unconscious with eyes half closed.</p>
<p>The doctor removed the head bandage, washed the wound, and exposed a cut about two inches long. Having cleaned it thoroughly, he examined the full extent of the injury by pressing the victim’s skull around the wound. He turned to me and said in English, “The wound is superficial. The skull doesn’t seem to be cracked. The victim has lost a good deal of blood, but he is a strong young man in excellent condition. Unless there is some complication from tetanus or infection – due more to their quack treatment than the wounds themselves – his life is in no danger. He should recover.”</p>
<p>I had Shamba transferred to the hospital on a stretcher and left strict orders that no one other than the doctor and his staff were to be allowed to see him. I left enough policemen in charge to ensure that my orders would be strictly carried out. I also left instructions that I was to be informed as soon as the patient had regained consciousness and was strong enough to speak.</p>
<p>The same evening, a messenger came to me and reported that Shamba had regained consciousness and was anxious to speak to me. I went to the hospital and saw the doctor first. He informed me that though his life was in no danger, Shamba himself was in deadly fear of his own impending death.</p>
<p>“It’s alright,” I said. “Then, may be he’ll tell us the whole truth.”</p>
<p>I went into Shamba’s ward and obtained a complete account. I will relate in my own words.</p>
<p>In the village of Bidirakka in the adjacent Holey Narsipur taluk lived a farmer, Boray Gowda by name. He was a relative of Devarsay Gowda – his brother-in-law or some other relation – I don’t now exactly recall. Anyway, this Boray Gowda had borrowed large sums of money from a Muslim leather merchant known as the Labbey Saheb, pledging his land as security. As Boray Gowda’s payments fell into arrears, his creditor – the Labbey Saheb – obtained a court order to have the land auctioned and gained title to it by coming up with the highest bid. For a member of the Vokkaliga caste like Boray Gowda, land ownership was not just his means of livelihood, but a matter of honor and even a reflection on his manhood. Loss of land meant loss of his identity as ‘mannina maga’ – or son of the soil. With the help of some friends and fellow caste members, Boray Gowda tried desperately to prevent losing his land by coming up with the necessary money; but it was too late. He then swore that he would never let the Labbey Saheb or any of his men enter the lands he had just forfeited.</p>
<p>“If you can stop me, you’re a man indeed,” said the Labbey Saheb stroking his flowing beard, adding insult to injury, “true son of a Gowda.”</p>
<p>After this humiliation, Boray Gowda went to his kinsman Devarsay Gowda and begged him to save his land and his honor. As we have seen before Devarsay Gowda was a nobleman by temperament who could never turn down an appeal. He sent ten or twelve of his men – servants and followers from Saligrama to Bidirakka to join Boray Gowda and his party. Although the episode had started out as a land dispute, it had taken on a communal tinge – Boray Gowda being a Hindu, while the Labbey Saheb was a Muslim – though majority of his party was probably Hindu. This was a potentially volatile mix, for the Maharaja and his Government set great store by communal harmony among the subjects.</p>
<p>Accompanied by a gang armed with clubs, swords, guns, and other weapons, the Labbey Saheb attempted to take possession of the land and plough the field. But Boray Gowda and his men, reinforced by the contingent from Saligrama, took possession of the property, and tried to physically prevent the Labbey’s party from entering it. Soon Boray Gowda’s party gained the upper hand, and the Labbey’s men found themselves unable to hold their positions. In desperation, someone in the Labbey’s party shot and killed one of Boray Gowda’s men. This let loose all restraint and broke into a riot in which a few men were killed and several suffered serious injuries. Shamba received a blow to the head with a club early in the melee, and before he could recover, he received several slashes from a sword or some other sharp instrument. His companions wrapped him in a blanket, treated him as best as they could and brought him back to Saligrama. This had taken place three or four days before we found him unconscious in the town gym.</p>
<p>I was dumbfounded. How could there be such anarchy, this day and age, when Krishna Raja IV ruled our land? Although Bidirakka, where the crime had taken place, lay outside my taluk and district jurisdiction, several of the participants were from Saligrama which came under my jurisdiction. Worst of all, why hadn’t anyone done anything? There wasn’t even a report let alone charges until my orderly brought it to my notice.</p>
<p>I was particularly upset that the authorities in the neighboring Holey Narsipur taluk and Hassan district seemed to have done nothing in the days after the crime. Where were the police and the Amildar? (Had they done something, I would surely have known about it by now.) I decided that as a magistrate sworn to uphold the law, and, more importantly, as a servant of the Maharaja, I could not let things slide when a crime of this magnitude had been committed in any part of the country subject to his rule.</p>
<p>Much valuable time had already been lost, with it possibly crucial evidence. So I decided to take the matter into my own hands and act at once. From Shamba the Vagabond, I obtained a list of names of some seven or eight men of the Saligrama contingent and had them arrested and placed in custody. I was unable to catch up with two or three other men, especially Devarsay Gowda’s son Kaley Gowda who was said to have been their ring leader. Kaley Gowda later claimed that he had been away for several weeks in Mandya or some other place, and was therefore nowhere in the vicinity of the crime. I did not arrest Devarsay Gowda, but kept his house under close watch.</p>
<p>Soon after the arrests, I sent a detailed report of my findings to the Amildar of Holey Narsipur taluk and also to the deputy commissioner (DC) of Hassan district, making sure they were hand delivered by my messengers. I also sent a confidential report to my DC Sirdar Kantha Raje Urs (Sparkes had retired and Kantha Raje Urs had taken his place).</p>
<p>“The authority of the Government will be seriously undermined,” I wrote in my report to the Sirdar, “if we fail to act vigorously and in a timely fashion in the face of such a serious crime. Hasan district authorities had done nothing in the three or four days following the riot, until it came to my notice as it did purely by accident. I have taken whatever steps I feel are necessary at this time. Although the riot itself took place in a district not under our jurisdiction, many of the participants are domiciled in my taluk. Also, many related activities – such as the conspiracy, planning, and others – took place in towns under my charge. For these reasons, while I am of the opinion that I have full authority to try this case, a good part of the investigation must go on in Holey Narsipur taluk in Hassan district. I am prepared fully to co-operate with the Hassan authorities; if not, I am also ready to press forward with the investigation on my own. It is important that the rule of law be made to prevail.”</p>
<p>Kantha Raje Urs wholeheartedly agreed with me. After studying my report, he wrote back, “To the extent possible, press on with the investigation in your taluk. If officials from the other district come forward asking for your help, hand over the case to them with all your records. But it is important that the investigation be pursued vigorously and without any more delay. I have written also to the Hassan DC along the same lines.”</p>
<p>The following day Kantha Raje Urs came to see me and commended me on my actions personally. He was uncharacteristically upset.</p>
<p>“You’re absolutely right in what you did, Mr. Rama Rao,” he said to me. “What if the crime took place in a different district? Who cares about these niceties when a crime of this magnitude has been committed? Are those people not subject to the Maharaja’s rule and the same laws? Do these people think it is some sort of a game they are playing? We can’t have anarchy. The rule of law must prevail, come what may.”</p>
<p>Messages must have been flying back and forth between the two districts – by mail, by telegram, by private couriers, and everything else. A few days later, while camping in Saligrama, Krishna Iyer, the Amildar of Holey Narsipur and the Hassan district superintendent of police (DSP), Narayan Rao of Saligrama, came to see me. By a coincidence, DSP Narayan Rao too was a native of Saligrama. This was soon to lead to some difficulties in the case. They were annoyed with me for acting in a manner that showed them in poor light. The DSP was an old friend and a well-wisher who had known me from childhood. And yet, he felt upstaged by my vigorous pursuit of a case technically in his charge. I showed the visitors all the records I had put together since the discovery of the crime.</p>
<p>“The conspiracy and the preparations that took place in Saligrama,” I pointed out to them, “and the riot in Bidirakka, are two parts of a single crime. I believe I have full authority to try this case. At the same time, the site of the crime, many of the witnesses, a majority of the perpetrators, and other related parties are in your district. I have no objection to your investigating the whole case. I’ll hand over all my records and will co-operate with you in every way. At the same time, I do expect to be fully involved in the process. I should be consulted on all matters, and, in the event of any differences of opinion, there must be room for resolving them through discussion. The important thing is that the investigation must go on with full vigor.”</p>
<p>They agreed to my conditions with some reluctance.</p>
<p>“What are we to do next?” The Amildar asked making no effort to hide his unhappiness. “We’ve arrested everyone concerned in Bidirakka</p>
<p>– except those who had already escaped. Autopsy reports, medical certificates, and all other records – we have them. What is there to be done in Saligrama? What kind of co-operation do we need from you?”</p>
<p>“You should be in a better position than I to decide what you may need from me,” I replied, trying not to exacerbate an already tense situation. “But let me make just one suggestion. We must be evenhanded and arrest each of the leaders – the leaders of the two rival factions, that is. I don’t know who exactly the ring leader of the Labbey’s party was – it was probably the Labbey Saheb himself – but you must know that by now. He must be arrested immediately.”</p>
<p>The visitors nodded their heads indicating that he had already been arrested.</p>
<p>“On the other side,” I continued, “It is beginning to look like Patel Devarsay Gowda had at least a hand. I see the imprint of his handiwork at every stage of my investigation so far. Witnesses hesitate to come forward, and even when they do, they don’t speak freely as if in fear of him. If he and the Labbey Saheb decide to come to some sort of an agreement and settle the dispute between them, all evidence will dry up. That is sure to make us a laughing stock. And having already arrested the Labbey Saheb, if you now fail to arrest the Gowda, you’ll leave yourself open to the charge of favoritism.”</p>
<p>I tried hard to be as detached as possible, but my last comment infuriated the Hassan DSP Narayan Rao.</p>
<p>“What favoritism are you talking about Rama Rao?” Narayan Rao asked me heatedly. “Just because I am from Saligrama and my brother happens to a leading figure in that town – can you charge me with bias? Of course our two families – Devarsay Gowda’s and mine have known each other for years. But just for that – how can you say I would show him any special favor? At the same time, we can’t just go and arrest him. We have no evidence against the man. What are we going to charge him with?”</p>
<p>“Look,” I said, trying to calm him, “when I said ‘you,’ I didn’t mean ‘you’ as Narayan Rao, a fellow native of Saligrama and the Patel’s friend. I include myself in that group. Devarsay Gowda is close to me also. We have been through a good deal together over the past two years. But what we have on our hands is a very serious situation. As Amildar of Yedatore it’ll leave me open to the charge that I protected the Patel and his men. He must be arrested. Let the magistrate release him on bail.”</p>
<p>Narayan Rao looked miserable. However much he may deny it, it was clear he hated the prospect of arresting Devarsay Gowda, the leading figure of his hometown. I could see his position. The Gowda was not just the town leader; he was an elder, about the same age as my father. He must have been like a father figure to Narayan Rao.</p>
<p>“What if I don’t agree to arrest him?” he asked.</p>
<p>“Then I’ll arrest him myself and hand him over to you together with all other suspects I have arrested. I’ll also hand over to you all my records in the case. You’re free to do whatever you want. I’ll then send a report to my DC and wash my hands off the whole case. This affair is no more pleasant to me than it is to you.”</p>
<p>After this, Narayan Rao, his police inspector, and the Amildar of Holey Narsipur went into a private conference lasting about ten or fifteen minutes.</p>
<p>“We are prepared to arrest the Gowda,” said the Amildar upon their return from the meeting, “but we cannot do it without your help. I hear he is a very powerful local leader. We don’t have the manpower to arrest him by ourselves. We don’t know how exactly we should go about it. You should come with us so we don’t have a riot on our hands.”</p>
<p>“Certainly!” I replied with a laugh. “If you so wish, I’ll bell the cat for you. Let’s go.”</p>
<p>All this discussion had been taking place inside the Saligrama police station. The visit of two Amildars and a high district police official is not exactly an everyday occurrence in the life of a town like Saligrama. The word of it had gotten around, and scenting something unusual was afoot, a large crowd had begun to collect around the police station. Events of the past several days had already made the town people restive. Filled with misgivings and good deal of distaste, I made my way to the Patel’s house, followed by the Hassan authorities. The crowd, which by then had swelled to more than a hundred, tailed us along. We had no way of dispersing them even if we wanted to.</p>
<p>The Patel lived in a large house on the main street. I had visited him a few times and knew the place well. As I went up the stairs leading to the verandah, I was received by a young woman – a daughter-in-law of his I believe she was. When I asked to see Patel Devarsay Gowda, she started to mumble that he was not home. But before she could finish speaking, the commanding figure of the Gowda swept in between us, bareheaded, with a large dark shawl draped over his shoulders. The crowd was visibly excited and gave a muffled gasp. The Hassan authorities seemed overwhelmed by the situation, probably even a little scared. I also felt uneasy, but knowing the Gowda’s sense of honor, I felt it best to trust him and deal with him in good faith.</p>
<p>“Do we consort with donkeys that I must play false before God? Away young lady,” said the Patel, waving the young woman aside. “My lord,” he said bowing to me. “Here I am – your servant.”</p>
<p>It was a poignant moment. I had heard that the Gowda had not been in good health; he seemed to have lost a good deal of weight. I felt a rush of pity upon seeing this aged head of a large family, and the proud chief of his ancient clan brought to his present state.</p>
<p>“Mr. Gowda, please sit down, sir,” I said, taking him by the hand. “I need to speak with you.”</p>
<p>The Hassan authorities, who until then had stayed in the background, walked up the steps and joined us in the verandah.</p>
<p>“These, sir, are fateful times for you,” I continued speaking to the Gowda. “But if you are not guilty, you have nothing to fear. You know very well I bear you no ill will. But unhappily – I am the bearer of some bad news for you. But you can trust me. I’ll assure you that justice will be done. We do have a very serious matter on our hands – a riot and murder case – in which you have been implicated. We are both servants of the king, and the law of the land must take its course. Who are we to defy destiny?”</p>
<p>All this was philosophy. Then I finally came to the point of our visit.</p>
<p>“You stand accused of conspiracy with Kaley Gowda and Boray Gowda in the riot and murder case in Bidirakka. The police superintendent of Hassan and the Amildar of Holey Narsipur are here to arrest you.”</p>
<p>He blanched. His gleaming dark face acquired an ashen pallor that ill became him. He was speechless for a while, as beads of perspiration broke out on his face.</p>
<p>“What I am to do my lord?” he sighed resignedly, after he had recovered from the shock. “These hotheads – they think they know everything. Without asking me, they have gone and done this dreadful deed; these spoilt, arrogant, indulgent, bastards!”</p>
<p>He shook his head and buried his face in his blanket.</p>
<p>“If this was done without your knowledge,” I replied, “then sir, you have reached the age – an age too great for you to rule your people. So what? All of us will reach old age, should God grant us. But if the acts took place without your knowledge, you have nothing to fear. But that needs to be established in court. Once charged, the courts must rule.”</p>
<p>I then came to the matter at hand.</p>
<p>“We have a more immediate concern here,” I continued. “If you should act in haste – why would you act in haste? I mean, should any of your men try anything foolish, should they try to obstruct our investigation or court proceedings it’ll make an already bad situation greatly worse. These men, they have to arrest you – not out of any personal animosity or malice you understand. It’s their duty. I’ll take personal responsibility to see you’re treated fairly. You have my word.”</p>
<p>As this was going on, the front yard of the house was getting filled with people. A policeman came to me and whispered that the street was also full of people, and that they were becoming increasingly restive. This heightened my concern.</p>
<p>“Mr. Gowda,” I said turning to the Patel, “I am telling you for your own good, really. Please calm your people. Come with us as if of your own free will. If your people do anything foolish, it will do them no good, and it’ll also seriously hurt your defense in the courts. Just ask them to stay calm – not to get rough. Tell them to have no fear – that you’re going with us to report to the police what you already know – of your own free will. If there is any mischief, it will mean first your honor and then your life will be in danger. If you’ll come with us like a reasonable man, no one will touch you. Otherwise, the police will have to handcuff you.”</p>
<p>“How can you promise him that I say?” asked the Holey Narsipur Amildar in English. “I think we must handcuff him.”</p>
<p>It made me furious. This man, who had done nothing for four days following the crime, who didn’t have the courage even to approach Devarsay Gowda without me, had suddenly turned brave mistaking the nobleman’s aristocratic gentleness for weakness. He failed to see the grave danger of his followers turning their wrath against us. One misstep was enough to rouse them.</p>
<p>“For God’s sake, don’t do anything foolish,” I shot back in English, “It’s hard enough as it is. He is a sort of uncrowned king here – don’t you see? And if once some roughness starts, where are we? And after all, he is an old man and a sick man at that. Are you afraid he will run or fight if not cuffed or chained?”</p>
<p>The police superintendent supported me. As a fellow native of Saligrama who had known Devarsay Gowda all his life, he was deeply affected by the fate that had befallen this great man in his old age.</p>
<p>“I’ll take your word sir,” said the Gowda saluting me with folded hands. “Your house is noble. You have a father – a gray-haired man like me. You have a family. You know what is just and what is unjust. I place my life and my honor in your hands. Your word is all I need.”</p>
<p>Then turning to the crowd assembled in his house, he addressed them with the air of a king addressing his subjects.</p>
<p>“O Lachuma! O Poojari! This town has fallen on evil times. All kinds of ugly accusations have been made against my town. I must clear the air and restore our honor. I must now leave. My lord! I’m ready.”</p>
<p>This led to an uproar. The crowd had jammed the entrance making it impossible for us to leave. I was now getting seriously concerned, and the Holey Narsipur authorities were totally at a loss. Although we had come to arrest him, in reality, we were now completely at the mercy of Devarsay Gowda. Our only safeguard was the Gowda’s own sense of honor and trust, and his authority over his people. The Gowda went to the entrance and spoke summoning his most commanding voice.</p>
<p>“My fellow children! We are the subjects of our rulers. Over these fifty years, I have faithfully served three kings and our beloved Queen Mother. The Maharaja’s Government is our mother and our father. There have been accusations that some ruffians from our town have been mixed up in the ugly business in Bidirakka. The honor of this fair town is my honor. If my town is dishonored, what is my life worth? I’m going to try and save our good name; in my absence don’t do anything to bring us down. Our Subedar – Navaratna Rao Sahib – is our King’s representative. He is fair and noble – our lord and our justice. What have we to fear? You just go to your homes and await my return. When my children are back in town, tell them what I just told you. God is great.”</p>
<p>Then placing upon his head a turban brought to him by a lady of the house, he turned to me and said: “Let’s go my lord!”</p>
<p>We went to the Traveler’s Bungalow followed by hundreds of people. The Gowda stepped on to the verandah and seated himself on a seat covered with a carpet specially prepared for him. The policemen at the bungalow stood up and bowed to him, treating him with utmost deference. It was fortunate that we had decided not to handcuff him. I have to wonder if any policeman would have laid a hand on the Patel. The front yard was full of commotion, with a large crowd milling around. I was occupied discussing our next course with Narayan Rao. He and I both felt that Devarsay Gowda should be released on bond on his own word, but the Holey Narsipur Amildar was not agreeable.</p>
<p>As this was being debated, the police Jemadar whispered to me, “Look sir! Mr. Kaley Gowda,” and pointed to someone in the crowd. I turned around but failed to see Kaley Gowda, Devarsay Gowda’s son. If in fact he had been there, he had melted into the crowd.</p>
<p>“He was there just a moment ago sir,” said the Jemadar.</p>
<p>“Did you see him?” I asked Narayan Rao.</p>
<p>He shook his head. The Amildar had his back to the crowd and had seen nothing. In any case he didn’t know Kaley Gowda by sight.</p>
<p>This incident became a sticky point in the trial that followed. Kaley Gowda claimed that he had been away at Mandya and other places during the crime and didn’t return for several weeks. But the police Jemadar had written in the station log that he had pointed him out to me in the crowd at the Traveler’s Bungalow, but had failed to record that neither I nor Narayan Rao saw him. I have no way now of knowing if it was a deliberate omission or just an oversight; I am inclined to think it was just a slip. When the case came to trial, there were strong suggestions that I should testify as actually having seen Kaley Gowda on that day. My refusal to do so led to some coolness in the relationship between me and a friend that lasted quite a while.</p>
<p>Devarsay Gowda was arrested but released on bond. I handed over all my records to the Hassan authorities and stayed out of the case. Kantha Raje Urs indicated to me that the Hassan authorities were unhappy with my aggressive role in what they regarded as their turf. They seemed to feel that I had upstaged them, though without my defusing the tense situation in Saligrama, they may well have walked into disaster. The Hassan DC Mr. K.R. Srinivas Iyengar presided over the preliminary hearing and committed the case to the Sessions Court. The presiding judge at the Sessions Court was Mr. Param Shivaiah with whom I had an amusing encounter. I’ll relate it shortly. <sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-018-01">1 </a></sup></p>
<p>I was called in to testify in both the courts. My family and I made the trip to Hassan by ox-cart, stopping in Holey Narsipur, and meeting several old friends from my Madras Law College days along the way. Upon reaching Hassan, I also met the DC K.R. Srinivas Iyengar first making his acquaintance in the city club before seeing him officially in court. A friend of mine who had worked for him had told me that Mr. Iyengar was a very brilliant man who ruled his district with the authority and dignity reminiscent of the Commission days. When I met him for the first time, he might have been a little displeased with me for interfering in a case in his district. My impression of him at that time was – he was certainly able and intelligent, but not any more than I was. As for being proud – well, why shouldn’t he be? I knew how proud I was in my office of Amildar. He had youth, authority, and excellent career prospects. Over the years, I got to know him better and began to appreciate his many fine qualities. I later had the opportunity of working with him first as his subordinate, and later as a colleague. Now in my autumn years, it is a source of pride and happiness to me that I have his friendship.</p>
<p>The case proceeded relatively smoothly and sentences were handed out. I cannot recall now if anyone received the death penalty. Several were acquitted – among them Devarsay Gowda and his son Kaley Gowda, which made me happy. During the trial, the turf battles between Mysore and Hassan districts, as well those between my taluk and Holey Narsipur taluk were needlessly dragged into the case. The prosecution tried to pin on me the blame for their delay in the investigation, claiming that I had complicated the case for them by arresting innocent persons including Devarsay Gowda and his son. This was a complete reversal of their own earlier position when they had tried very hard to implicate Kaley Gowda and failed.</p>
<p>The sessions judge Mr. Param Shivaiah, though critical of the Hassan authorities, seemed ambivalent about my role in the case, or my ‘interference’ as the Hassan authorities termed it.</p>
<p>“When nothing was done for three or four days,” he wrote in his judgment, “until the Yedatore Amildar took matters into his own hands, was it such a bad thing for him to interfere? Or, would it have been better to ignore the whole thing, even when such a serious crime had taken place?”</p>
<p>Nonetheless he wrote as follows in his final judgment:</p>
<p>“Mr. Navaratna Rama Rao, the highly intelligent and energetic Amildar of Yedatore, has the tactless impetuosity of youth and precipitated matters.”</p>
<p>The presiding judge later claimed that he intended this to be read as a compliment to me. But I failed to see it in that light at the time. I have attempted here to reproduce his comments verbatim from a judgment I last saw nearly fifty years ago. Still, I am fairly certain that my recollection is close to what he actually wrote. I have certainly not forgotten anything complimentary he said about me, but my memory may have diluted his criticism. In any event, these comments came to my office for explanation through the district magistrate’s office. It wasn’t clear to me what sort of “explanation” was called for. So, I wrote the following word-by-word analysis of his statement.</p>
<ol>
<li>“Youth” – I plead guilty, but fail to see how I can be held responsible for it. </li>
<li>“Intelligence, ability” – If I have them, it is God’s grace. I am grateful for the recognition, but can offer no examples. </li>
<li>“Precipitate action” – The honorable judge himself has criticized the prosecution for taking no action until I entered the case. It is my experience that vigorous, perhaps even precipitate action is needed to overcome inaction and inertia. If I have been wrong, I crave the judge’s pardon. </li>
</ol>
<p>This eventually made its way to the desk of Justice Param Shivaiah. We were both members of the Cosmopolitan Club in Mysore. Shortly after this case had been closed, I was playing bridge at the Club when I felt a hand on my shoulder. I turned around and saw the Justice standing behind me with a big grin on his face.</p>
<p>“Splendid!” he laughed. “I had thought that impertinence was in danger of becoming extinct with my generation. Having seen you, I see now my fears were unfounded. I received your thanks for my generous comments. Now you have my thanks for your comments.”</p>
<p>For Patel Devarsay Gowda, the episode had exacted a heavy price. Though cleared of any involvement in the crime, his failure as a servant of the king to report his knowledge of the crime was a serious dereliction of duty. I was left with no option but recommend his removal from office. He had placed loyalty to his men above his official duties; they were his people and he had to protect them at all costs. In the end, this noble chief of his ancient clan, this proud holder of the hereditary chieftainship which his family had enjoyed for generations, had, through his own acts of blindness, deprived himself and his descendants of the fruits of his ancestors.</p>
<p>It was a tragedy both in the Greek and the Shakespearean sense: the gods were against him, but he was betrayed no less by his own faults and his virtues.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
