<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>THE VANISHED RAJ</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-021">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">21 </span> NARSIPUR, PEOPLE, AND PRACTICES </h1>
		<p><strong><em>Different perceptions of Narsipur. The two main communities. </em></strong></p>
		<p>Following my transfer to Narsipur, I made an effort to learn as much as possible about the place and its people. I contacted a few of my friends and acquaintances that had served there. The results proved more entertaining than enlightening. A frustrated man who thought he was too old to enjoy life by the time he was posted there told me, “You are lucky I must say to be going there when you are still young. You can really enjoy life.” Another said, “It’s a horrid place. Murders at every turn, piles of anonymous petitions, factions and rivalries in every village and town. Count yourself lucky if you have any reputation left by the time you finish your term there.” Yet another told me, “It is a heavenly place – with nothing to do except bathe in the river and worship at the temples. It is like ashramas of ancient rishis.” I suppose there was the service of apsaras in ancient ashramas. <sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-021-01">1 </a></sup></p>
		<p>The Amildar who handed over charge to me was more specific. “It is a troublesome charge,” he told me. “There are large villages and towns with self-important and scheming individuals. They take almost every case to Mysore or Najangud. The subdivision also tends to interfere in the taluk administration rather too much.” He then mentioned the name of the Patel of a village near Nanjangud by name and said, “He is very influential in some circles and somewhat fond of intrigues. If you happen to cross him you can expect some trouble. He may try to get you a bad name in a hurry.”</p>
		<p>For all this trouble I had learnt that Narsipur was as pleasant as spring, hot like summer, and as peaceful as autumn. These qualities can be found in all the taluks in the state. All it means is that we tend to find what we seek. This reminds me of an episode from my student days in the Law College, in Madras. A young businessman from one of the small southern towns came to our hotel, and with an expression of utter disgust on his face, said, “What is this wonderful Madras everyone is talking about? This is a wretched, rotten place.” Someone asked him what made him so despondent.</p>
		<p>“I was told in my hometown that in Madras, golden girls will be looking at you from balcony windows. They will come down on their own and talk to young men wandering in the streets. For the last three days I have worn out three pairs of slippers walking the streets of Madras, and not a soul cared to find out if I am alive or dead.”</p>
		<p>He must have received an excessively rosy picture of Madras from a more than ordinarily romantic soul.</p>
		<p>From my own experience I did not find Narsipur to be all that different from other taluks of Mysore that I knew. But – and I say this with some hesitation, but it must be said – weak administration over the past several years both at the taluk and the subdivision level had allowed a crop of local leaders to sprout and set up power centers. This is always the case; society, no less than nature, abhors a vacuum. Here it was a case of local leaders rising up to fill a power vacuum.</p>
		<p>The town of T. Narsipur, the taluk seat, sits at the junction of two rivers – the Kaveri and the Kabini. Area north of the Kabini River was dominated by the Vokkaliga community similar in most ways to the Vokkaligas of Yedatore that I was familiar with. The southern part of the taluk – south of the Kabini – was the stronghold of the Veerashaivas.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-021-02">2 </a></sup>I found a distinct difference in the attitude and conduct of the two dominant communities. This is just my personal observation that could be limited to the time and place of my experience. Here it is for what it is worth.</p>
		<p>Both the communities were brave and industrious, but the Vokkaligas had an ingrained respect for the Government and its institutions.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-021-03">3 </a></sup>They were for the most part law-abiding people, straight and open in their dealings. Hardworking and frugal by nature, unostentatious in dress, they followed a simple lifestyle. Conservative by nature, they held Brahmins in high regard; I am speaking of course of those days in the early years of the century. In any event there was little of the caste-related rivalry that was to come to the fore in later years. As the great majority of Shanbogs were Brahmins, they were often consulted on matters relating to business and even domestic affairs, and their advice usually followed. A strong bond of tradition and respect existed between the Brahmins and the Vokkaligas.</p>
		<p>The people living in the southern part of Narsipur taluk – mostly Veerashaivas – were more prosperous than the Vokkaligas to the north of the river. The reason was the wealth brought by the silk industry.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-021-04">4 </a></sup>Where the Vokkaligas of the north were mainly agriculturists, almost every household in the south was engaged in silk-rearing. The larger villages also had facilities for bulk production of silk yarn and of course silk trade. As a result, where the Vokkaliga villages had the look of peasant settlements, Veerashaiva villages were prosperous little towns. This was reflected in their dress and lifestyle, which resembled that of larger towns like Mysore and Najangud. Each village in these parts was like a small feudal estate. The silk business provided opportunities for moneylenders, with some of them becoming lakhiers and millionaires, gaining recognition as sahukars (capitalists). Several of them had accumulated substantial wealth through trade in places like Bangalore and Kollegal.</p>
		<p>The influence of Brahmins in this part of the taluk, dominated as it was by the Veerashaivas, was slight. To begin with, Brahmins, engaged in traditional activities, tended to be less prosperous. The Veerashaivas who constituted the majority in these parts were not only indifferent to the Brahmins, but also carried the historic hostility of their faith. Since the Veerashaiva sect was born as a revolt against Brahmins, this hostility was only natural. I am not suggesting that it was unfair or unnatural, but only stating what I saw. This sometimes had a negative effect on the administration in these parts. Since the Patel tended to be a follower of the Veerashaiva sect and the Shanbog usually a Brahmin, the situation was tailor made for rival factions. <sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-021-05">5 </a></sup></p>
		<p>Before coming to Narsipur, I had heard that jangamas wielded enormous power over the people of these parts. There were stories that people regarded such men as ‘walking Gods’, and surrendered to them body and soul. I had also been told that most of these men were impostors who took advantage of the blind faith of women to satisfy their needs. I had difficulty believing such stories. Even if half of them were true, these mendicants must be monsters and the people all fools. This could only be a caricature, far removed from reality. Their conduct and morality could not be all that different from ours. They must have good and bad people, saints and charlatans, in more or less the same proportion as the rest of the population.</p>
		<p>A French missionary by name Abbe Dubois visited these parts in the early years of the nineteenth century and left a record of his experiences in a famous book, which is often taken to be an authoritative account of the life and practices of its people. It contains a detailed account of the Mudukutore jatra – an important event for the Veerashaivas of these parts. According to his account, the Mudukutore jatra was a hotbed of sin and licentiousness. Reading him made me wonder if such practices could exist in any society. I suspected that he was actually describing his own fantasies growing out of the suppressed desires of a Christian monk condemned to a life of celibacy.</p>
		<p>This was confirmed later, when I had to be at the Mudukutore jatra in my official capacity as Amildar, in charge of security and other arrangements. I then had the opportunity to observe the people at first hand. I then said to myself, “O poor, wretched Dubois! Why did you have to come all the way here – to satisfy your needs by venting your frustrations and abusing the simple, harmless folk of our villages! Could you not have stayed in your own country and satisfied your desires at the various carnivals that are closer to your own fantasies?” <sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-021-06">6 </a></sup></p>
		<p>The truth is that the people who attend the Mudukutore jatra bear no resemblance to the grotesque caricatures found in Dubois’ book. The pilgrims that I came to know at the jatra were true devotees, filled with joy and simple-hearted devotion for their favourite deity. And the jangamas that I saw, far from being cunning scoundrels, were the simplest souls one could imagine. They had no sense of the real world. I cannot think of anyone less fitted to advise others of the affairs of the world than these illiterate men. All the ‘influence’ they commanded earned them a serving of food at mealtime or a bowl of rice or a few annas from a compassionate soul. They commanded some affection – more often pity – from the people, but little respect and certainly no authority. The real villains of this society were the sophisticated, unscrupulous men of the world, familiar with the courts and government procedures of Mysore and Nanjangud who didn’t hesitate to prey on the ignorance of the common people.</p>
		<p>Farmers of these villages are very fine people. Good-looking, powerfully-built men, but for reasons that I could never fathom, quick to anger, and, when angry, prone to lose all sense of proportion. In a situation where a normally quick-tempered man might slap, these men would deliver a blow with an axe or a machete. I recall an incident when a gentle-faced youth lost his temper in an argument, and cut down two men and then surrendered himself to the police. In response to a question during the autopsy he simply said, “I don’t know why I did this, sir. I guess I lost my temper.” He spoke as though such behavior was nothing unnatural – something anyone in his position might have done. And he was by no means alone in those parts.</p>
		<p>Members of other communities in the area – kurubas, parivaras, adikarnatakas and a few others – looked upon the Veerashaivas as leaders and followed them in their own living style and habits. This applied in general to the areas south of the Kabini (and the Kaveri), in places like Kasaba and Moogur and those east of the Kaveri river like Talkad; similar conditions prevailed in Nanjangud, Chamarajnagar, Yelandur, and Kollegal – the last in the then Madras Province.</p>
		<p>I loved these people. “This is truly sanctified, heroic, land,” I felt, “and its people are the heroic subjects of our kings.” Good health and active living combined with good blood had given these men and women the energy and the enthusiasm to enjoy life. They had also a capacity to see the absurd and the humorous in things. This sometimes helped in turning a potentially ugly situation into a harmless farce. I recall one incident in particular. It came about as follows.</p>
		<p>During the huzur jamabandi the subdivision officer (SDO) and I happened to be camping in a village. The SDO was camped in a grove outside the village, while I was put up in the schoolhouse in the middle of the town. At about two in the morning, I was awakened by a large commotion not far from where I was sleeping. I sent my orderly to the spot on the main road – the village had a single main road – to find out the cause of the commotion. The orderly came back to me reported that one of the SDO’s servants – a vagrant boy in his early twenties who fancied himself a ladies’ man – had tried to molest Patel Siddamalliah’s wife and had got caught in the act. I was horrified knowing the hair-trigger temper of these villagers. Throwing a shawl around my shoulders, I rushed to the spot to prevent the disaster that I thought was sure to happen.</p>
		<p>No one recognized me in the dim light of the street lanterns as I made my way to the place, opposite the Patel’s house. As I reached the spot, the commotion turned into a chorus of guffaws and hearty laughter. The spectacle unfolding before my eyes made me also join in the general laughter. There were some twenty or thirty men with shawls and blankets around their shoulders laughing uncontrollably. A tall, middle-aged woman of imposing presence – built like Goddess Chamudeshwari – was holding by the neck a small, befuddled, consumptive-looking young man with disheveled hair, who was stammering incoherently. The Gowda – obviously the proud husband of the woman – was laughing loudest of all. Then, holding both wrists of the consumptive boy in a single massive hand, she roughly pushed up the chin of the hapless youth and ordered him, “Show your pretty face to everyone, you bastard!”</p>
		<p>Here is the account with which she edified the assembled citizens.</p>
		<p>“In the dead of night I heard a knock on the door, and someone saying, ‘Open the door.’ Taking it to be my husband returning from his trip to Moogur, I opened the door. It was this little runt. He came into the house and said, ‘Shut the door, shut it.’ He had been here a few times before – for supplies of milk and butter for the SDO Sahib. ‘What is the matter, this late in the night?’ I asked him. Without a word, he tried to grab my breasts. I grabbed his hands, and told him, ‘You consumptive little brat! You came to me for this? If a brat like you were to swallow one mouthful of milk from my breasts, you’ll go into contortions, curl up, and die. And you came here to molest me!’ Then I gave him a sound thrashing and dragged him out into the street. As he was screaming for help, a few people came to check what was happening. As I was about to hand him over to them, the Gowda – my husband – also returned. This worm, this insect – is it proper for it to behave like this?”</p>
		<p>Her husband was a man of over six feet, of full, powerful build with a sweeping moustache – an impressive figure of masculinity. The spectacle of this imposing couple and a little fellow drawn to her like a moth to a fire – was enough to feed anyone’s mirth.</p>
		<p>What to do with the culprit? “Let us shave off his brows and his head,” said one. “Or how about parading him on a donkey with slippers around his neck.” Finally, a moderate voice, it sounded like the Patel’s, said, “What is all this nonsense? The Subedar and SDO Sahib are both in town. Do you want all of us to go to jail and drag this honorable woman to court? Let us just kick the bastard out of town.”</p>
		<p>Then holding the little fellow by the neck, Patel Siddamallaiah, the husband of the offended lady, delivered three solid kicks to the buttocks, releasing his hold on the fellow’s neck to synchronize with the third. As if loathe to lose the momentum of the kicks, the poor little fellow took off like a rocket and disappeared into the night. The crowd also dispersed.</p>
		<p>Within a short time, I developed a close bond of friendship and mutual regard with the Veerashaiva people of Narsipur taluk. It grew to the point that they would voluntarily follow my directions even in matters outside my official duties. I will relate later the story of the restoration of the historic temples carried out by these people under my direction.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-021-07">7 </a></sup> During the restoration work, which involved excavating the temples that had been buried in the sand dumped by the rivers, a thousand volunteers from all the villages worked by turns for nearly a month to complete the work. This was testimony to their devotion to God and their affection for me; there was no compulsion on my part. Not being part of my official work, I could not demand anything. Thanks to their devotion these historic temples, buried so deep in the sand that even their peaks could not be seen, are now back in service following royal consecration.</p>
		<p>Seeing this extraordinary devotion, a senior friend of mine who was visiting the place joked,<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-021-08">8 </a></sup> “In the old days, you could have ruled the place as a feudal lord.”</p>
		<p>“Their affection is like a tax due to the rulers,” I retorted. “Like all other levies, I hand this over to the Maharaja. I am receiving this bounty only because I am his representative.”</p>
		<p>When I look back to those days, there are times when I can scarcely believe how lavishly I have been blessed with love and friendship. This, like wealth, is a gift of God. It may be bestowed on an undeserving individual, or a deserving one may not be so fortunate. In my case I feel it is due to the simple fact that I have always treated everyone as an individual, without the slightest regard for caste or community. And people have responded in kind.</p>
		<p>This explains, I think, why the Veerashaivas followed me and supported me, in spite of my being a Brahmin.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-021-09">9 </a></sup>I believe that the Veerashaiva sect was born as a reaction against some social evils then prevailing, as a movement to cleanse the society of some of its undesirable practices. I respect their holy places and also their saints and leaders. I am naturally partial to simple-hearted people. My philosophy, as I received from my teachers, is to use my God-given talents to discharge my duties to the best of my ability without fear or favor. I know that several others who have tried to follow this simple principle have come to grief, but, in this regard, I can only say that have been more fortunate than most.</p>
		<p>All this of course applies to the ordinary people of the region; this is not to say that the place was free from schemers and troublemakers inclined to mischief. Upon hearing of my transfer to Narsipur, several of these parties made inquiries about my background, trying to learn as much as possible about my method of administration as well as my personal likes and dislikes. They seem to have contacted some Mysore lawyers who had appeared in cases before me for the purpose. I give below the picture that emerged from these inquiries, as it came to me via a circuitous route, in particular from two of my friends – Dharma Rao and Venkata Ramana Shrauti.</p>
		<p>I was honest, short-tempered, not easily influenced by others, stubborn, courageous, and cruel but fond of praise. In addition, I was the DC’s favorite Amildar with strong support at the highest levels of the Government. This had made me somewhat arrogant, making me believe that I could do no wrong. But they thought they had also spotted a chink in my armor; I was very fond of music and partial to musicians, especially of the female variety.</p>
		<p>This, of course, was a caricature obtained by exaggerating bits and pieces of information from different sources. The only detail in the picture that was close to truth was my love of music. Music has been a life-long passion with me.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-021-10">10 </a></sup>As a boy, I used to force my friends to listen to my singing, which often led to fights (I usually prevailed in arguments over my music because of my superior physical strength and I was a good wrestler). As I grew older, it dawned on me that singing was not my forte. I then took up the violin. It is never easy to share a room with someone learning to play the violin. There can be no higher tribute to Rajaji’s love for me than the fact that in all the years we were roommates, he never once complained or asked me to stop practicing the violin.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-021-11">11 </a></sup>Others, unfortunately, were not so generous. One lady in particular took an extreme step, which prevented me from playing the instrument for several months. It came about as follows.</p>
		<p>During our student days in Madras, Rajaji and I shared lodgings at the house of one Gurumurthy Iyer on Tambu Chetty Road. One morning, I pulled out my violin and began to practice the Bhairavi Varna, ‘Veeri Boni’.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-021-12">12 </a></sup>One by one the lodgers living on the floor fled from their rooms; only Rajaji held steadfast. But I refused to give up, and redoubled my efforts. I kept playing as if in a trance. After a while, fatigue sent my music wandering from its course – not that it had exactly been on course until then. Just then I heard a knock on my door. It was the maid working for the landlady.</p>
		<p>“My mistress says you have a very good violin,” she told me. “She wants to see it for herself.” Delighted, I handed her the instrument. The landlady promptly locked it in her safe and refused to return it. No amount of pleading from me would make her change the view that I was a public nuisance with the violin.</p>
		<p>Some two months later, as I was about to leave for Mysore following the end of the term, the landlady invited me in. She took out my violin from the safe, tuned it, and played the same ‘Veeri Boni’ with a mastery that would have put many a concert violinist to shame. She then handed the violin back to me and said, “Until your playing reaches the level that I just demonstrated, civilized behavior demands that you practice your violin in a remote place – like a sea shore or a mountaintop. The mountain in your native Mysore might be an ideal place.”</p>
		<p>The poor woman did not know the name of the Chamundi Hill in Mysore. I must apologize for wandering away from the main story. This is from the days when I was my own teacher, i.e. during my student days. Later, when I began working and could afford to pay for lessons, I engaged teachers. As my salary and my authority as an official grew, I noticed a corresponding growth in my skill or at least in the compliments that were showered on my violin playing. But like a true yogi, who attains self-realization, I too realized my true worth as a musician. It rid me of any illusions I might have had that I was a good violinist. <sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-021-13">13 </a></sup></p>
		<p>Yet, the years spent in learning to play the violin have not been in vain. It has resulted in a great love of music and a good appreciation of its finer points. I rarely missed recitals by good musicians. I would invite leading musicians to come to my place and arrange concerts. I tried also to encourage up and coming artists. As a result, many of the leading musicians who were active during my long life – from Mysore Vasudevachar, Veena Seshanna, and Tiger Vardachar, to younger artists like Chowdaiah and M.S. Subbu Lakshmi – became my friends. I used to greatly enjoy Bharata Natyam; I was particularly fond of the performance of Jayadeva’s Ashtapadis that combine singing and dancing. These loves have remained with me in old age.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
