<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>THE VANISHED RAJ</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-025">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">25 </span> A PLAGUE EPIDEMIC </h1>
		<p><strong><em>Unusual challenges of dealing with a plague epidemic. Using a medium to convince the tribals. Bringing Baba Saheb around. </em></strong></p>
		<p>I had to deal with a cholera epidemic when I was Amildar in charge of Yedatore taluk. The year I came to T. Narsipur as Amildar (1907), I had to deal with a plague epidemic that struck several towns and villages across the taluk. In my experience there are only two ways of effectively containing the epidemic – immunization by vaccination and camping outside the infected town until the epidemic passes. Remedies like disinfecting the houses and killing as many rats as possible are worthwhile goals, but their effectiveness is limited. One can never be sure that all the infection sources – fleas that carry the infection – have been totally eliminated. Hunting rats in their own habitat is of course never easy. They are highly elusive. It was for this reason that the Moghul Emperor Aurangazeb used to call the Maratha warrior Shivaji the ‘mountain rat’.</p>
		<p>I found it extraordinarily difficult to persuade village families to leave their homes for a temporary camp for the duration of the epidemic. The attachment of a farmer to his home and hearth is something that has to be seen to be believed. It is also not easy to set up camps to house large populations. I even incurred some displeasure in the Government with my persistent demands for building shelters for the displaced. I did manage to transport hundreds of cartloads of bamboo, sheets, and other materials from neighboring taluks like Chamarajnagar and Gundalpet and distributed them to the villages that I felt needed them the most. I marked out areas in government land and forest areas and gave them permits to erect temporary shelters. I got together the leaders of various communities and asked them to co-operate in setting up and running these camps. This worked well in the smaller villages where personal relationships are on the whole cordial. It didn’t work so well in large villages and towns where there tend to be factions and rivalries. I had to devise other ways of getting things done. When they worked, I was happy and the object of much praise. In hindsight not all of my devices may seem admirable, but I had little choice. Here is what I did in one of the villages.</p>
		<p>The village in question was Alagodahalli near Narsipur. Most of its inhabitants were boatmen and household workers. They were devotees of the Grama Devata, the village deity known as Alagodamma. Its priest was one Hotte Mada Nayaka.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-025-01">1 </a></sup>A particularly important person in their belief system was Mada Nayaka’s daughter Kempa Nanjamma. The villagers believed her to be the medium through which their Goddess Alagodamma spoke and advised them on important matters. Whenever faced with an important decision, they went to this woman for advice – just as the ancient Greeks went to the priestess of Delphi who was the medium for the Oracle. They followed the advice or the order issued by Kempa Nanjamma, which they accepted as the word of their Goddess.</p>
		<p>Rats began falling in the houses and barns of Adagolahalli. I advised the town folk to leave the village and camp outside, and also get inoculated. Normally they obeyed my instructions, but this time they had to answer to a higher authority – their Goddess Alagodamma.</p>
		<p>“We have built our houses and huts around her temple,” they pleaded. “How can we leave without her permission?”</p>
		<p>I saw the futility of my direct approach. I told them, “You are right. You cannot leave your Goddess without asking her first. Ask her and do as she orders.”</p>
		<p>All the village elders were to offer worship the following Friday and appeal to their Goddess through Kempa Nanjamma. They invited me also to attend the service and offer my prayers. On Thursday, the day before the important occasion, I learnt that the priest Mada Nayaka and his daughter Kempa Nanjamma were in Narsipur. I asked them to come over and see me about the service. After inquiring about the arrangements and the time at which I had to be present, I turned to Kempa Nanjamma and frankly told her, “Your Goddess is like the mother of your people. She always has their interest and welfare in her heart. If it is true that Goddess Alagodamma comes on you and speaks through you, she will surely tell her people to do what I have been telling them – get inoculated and camp outside the village until the epidemic passes. She will certainly not tell them to stay in the village and die like rats. When ordinary people like you and I have this knowledge and concern for our people, will the Goddess not have much more?”</p>
		<p>Kempa Nanjamma was a clever woman. She just said, “How can I know what Goddess will tell me, my lord? I speak for her, she doesn’t speak for me. But as you say, doesn’t the Goddess know what is good for her people? Let the villagers continue their prayers, feasts, and ‘harike’, and do as she tells them.”</p>
		<p>“What harike?” I asked.</p>
		<p>“If the Goddess tells them to go to camp, they must hold their prayers and festival in the camp. And they must tell her that they will build a small hut as a temple for her in the camp and continue their festivals and offerings.”</p>
		<p>Well, the following day I went to the Alagodahalli temple and sat with the devotees. We were close to five hundred in attendance, made up of locals as well as a significant number from nearby places. There was a tumultuous noise from the tom-toms, horns, trumpets, and conch-shells – all being played together – that engulfed the temple yard and soon reached the sky. The devotees began their offerings also of fruits, flowers, animals, lights, fires, and everything one could think of. When there was such an outpouring of devotion, would the Lord fail to hear their appeal? – I wondered.</p>
		<p>A thick pall of smoke from several fires and oil lamps covered the entrance to the temple like a screen. Shortly, I saw the figure of Kempa Nanjamma appear in the semi-darkness of the temple in the smoke. She was seated on the floor with a heap of kumkum in front of her. She seemed to be in a trance, eyes half-closed, her head moving slowly in a circular orbit. Her forehead was covered with kumkum, her hair wet and tied in a knot. She was wearing a sari soaked in haridra and water, which gave it a saffron hue. It was an impressive sight.</p>
		<p>As soon as I entered, someone called out, “Subedar is here, Mother!”</p>
		<p>She turned her face towards me. She was sweating profusely. The vermilion powder mixed with sweat pouring down her face gave the appearance of blood. Her eyes were half-closed, with a strange expression that one sometimes sees in a lunatic fit. She seemed to be in a state of some kind of a possession, brought on by the surroundings and the extraordinary nature of the event. I was concerned that she might let loose some gibberish as the message of the Goddess. I was relieved to hear her speak distinctly.</p>
		<p>“My children!” she spoke in an impressive voice. “You called me and I am here. What do you want from me, my lord?”</p>
		<p>I was concerned. The villagers habitually used the term ‘my lord’ as a term of respect in addressing me, but this was the Goddess Alagodamma speaking!<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-025-02">2 </a></sup>I decided I had to do something before someone’s suspicions could be aroused. I folded my hands and addressed her with utmost respect.</p>
		<p>“Great Mother! I may be a lord to these people. But with you – I am just a servant following your commands. Please do not make me look foolish and arrogant before your devotees by addressing me as ‘my lord’. We devotees are assembled before you as supplicants. What crimes have we committed to deserve this plague? What will make it go away? Why are you so angry with us? What should we do so you will favor us again with your blessings?”</p>
		<p>I have already said that Kempa Nanjamma was a very clever woman. The Goddess spoke through her as follows, “I called you ‘my lord’ to test your mind – your humility. You people of my village! You have ignored me and my temple for many days. You have closed its door and stopped being my devotees. So I brought this plague to teach you a lesson. My children! Have you learnt your lesson? At least now, worship your Goddess. Leave town, and camp in the grove by the side of the Moogur road. And take the medicine that the Subedar gives you. Don’t go against this!”</p>
		<p>After pronouncing this message Kempa Nanjamma collapsed into a swoon. The Goddess had left her. I saluted the Goddess in the temple and came out. After this everything went smoothly. People not only of Alagodahalli, but also from all the surrounding villages came to know of the proceedings and followed the advice of the Goddess. They set up camps outside their villages and moved out. Many of them also got themselves inoculated against the plague.</p>
		<p>Apparently, my approach though unconventional, was not unique. Necessity being the mother of invention, the human mind resorts to similar methods in similar situations. A couple of years ago, my friend Sir</p>
		<p>T. Vijaya Raghavachar told me of an episode where he, as Diwan of Cochin, had to use methods similar to mine to get the co-operation of the people. He did not at the time know of my experience.</p>
		<p>This brings me to another experience I had during the same plague epidemic. The village in question was Gargeshwari. In actual count, Kurubas and other Hindus were in the majority, but in terms of wealth and influence it was really a Muslim village – at least in those days. The chief of the Labbeys was one Baba Sahib who ruled his community like a feudal lord. These Labbeys, who had come to three villages in the area – Gargeshwari, Narsipur and Kirugaval – as traders had acquired considerable wealth and had become one of the dominant communities. They had the reputation of being capable of any crime and many were involved in smuggling. Because of this and the fact that they were a united lot in dealing with persons outside their community, people and families from respectable communities tended to avoid dealing with them. This was not a fear born out of cowardice, but rooted more in a sense of civilized behavior – that one could not get down to their level of unscrupulous conduct.</p>
		<p>The Gargeshwari Muslims and the Hindus differed on one other point: due to arrogance growing out of their newly acquired wealth, the Labbeys of Gargeshwari tended to look down on government officials, nearly all of whom were Hindus. Whenever an official visited Gargeshwari, the Hindus of the village treated them with respect and cordiality due to a Maharaja’s official, and offered co-operation. The Labbeys, on the other hand feigned indifference. They would stay in their shops or take positions in front of their houses, watching the official’s visit as some sort of entertainment show. If an official was sent to see one of them, they would appear but make it clear that they saw it as imposition and an unwarranted intrusion on their lives. I saw their whole behavior as a calculated gesture of defiance. As one who always liked to work with the people on the basis of friendship and co-operation, I found their attitude offensive. Still I felt it was beneath me to use my authority to bring them around. But during the plague epidemic, I had no choice but use my authority. It came about as follows.</p>
		<p>The plague struck the Gargeshwari village. The Hindu population took my advice and moved to camps outside the village. But the Labbeys refused to budge from their infected homes. Legally I had no authority to move them by force. Many of them died, but they would still not budge.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-025-03">3 </a></sup>I took the health officer from Mysore to Gargeshwari to get the people inoculated. Most of the Hindus came forward to meet us. To give them courage, I had myself inoculated first, right before their eyes. (My recollection is that I had myself vaccinated in small doses several times to facilitate this performance.) After this, the Hindus in Gargeshwari came in and got inoculated.</p>
		<p>I then sent for the Labbey families to come and get inoculated. Knowing that Muslim women would not come out, I offered to have lady doctors brought in from Mysore to treat them. No one came. Several Labbey youths were standing at a distance, treating the whole thing as a joke. This made me angry. It was not just a question of their insolent, insular behavior. An epidemic is like a fire and affects the whole area; it cannot be treated as a local or personal problem. It has to be treated as a community health problem. I sent for their chief Baba Sahib. He sent word that he was busy and would come and see me as soon he finished his work. But he slipped out of sight and never came. We waited a long while but there was no word of him. I decided to go and see him.</p>
		<p>When I went to Baba Sahib’s place I found his house locked. To those wandering about in the area, our frustration seemed like a huge joke. I felt that our failure might encourage even loyal subjects to think that they were unnecessarily subjected to a painful treatment, which they could avoid by defying me. This greatly annoyed me. Here was my problem: I had no legal authority to force anyone to leave home for the camp or get inoculated. But as I noted before, the health and safety of the whole village was endangered by their behavior. So I went around the house to see if there was any violation that might allow me to bring a charge against him.</p>
		<p>I saw that the sanitation around his place was wretched – far worse than what used to prevail in those days of relatively primitive sanitation. The place was filthy and foul-smelling. The sewage from the house was running in an open drain and emptying into a large puddle or a small pool. Some hens and cocks, a few ducks and crows, were playing about the pool. This was a violation of the health code. Of course, Baba Sahib was hardly alone in violating it, but it gave me the grounds for filing a charge against him. I sent for the sanitary inspector and told him, “Can’t you see this filthy mess? Don’t you know your duty? Isn’t it your job to take note of such violations of the health code and bring charges against the violators?”</p>
		<p>I left the scene. The sanitary inspector immediately collected some witnesses and filed a charge of health code violation against Baba Sahib. The charge, filed in my court, stated that Baba Sahib was guilty of endangering the health of the whole village by the poor sanitation of his house. As soon as he heard the news, Baba Sahib came near my house to see me. My servants refused to admit him stating that they had orders to refuse admission to anyone who had not been inoculated against the plague. They also informed him that he could see me in my office if he had any business. I was busy when he came. I made him wait until I finished my work and then asked him in. He spoke to me with the respect due to a Maharaja’s official, but in a tone of suppressed anger.</p>
		<p>“The sanitary inspector has filed a charge of code violation against me,” he complained. “Am I the only one in this village guilty of it?”</p>
		<p>“I don’t have to answer your question,” I replied. “If there is a charge against you, it will be heard in my court in due course. I am busy now. Is that all you have?”</p>
		<p>He stood waiting expectantly but I returned to the files on my table. He left.</p>
		<p>His case was heard in my court. I held the hearings at different places in the taluk – Bannur one day, Talkad next, Moogur on the third, and so on. This forced the old man to travel across the taluk, to nearly all the major villages. He tried very hard to have the case transferred to a different court but failed. After a few days of this, one of Baba Sahib’s relatives from Narsipur came to see me. After a few preliminary pleasantries, he requested me to settle the case against Baba Sahib amicably. He agreed to have the necessary repairs done to ensure that the drainage around his house would pose no sanitation problems for the village.</p>
		<p>“Let him do as you say, then I’ll see.”</p>
		<p>It was legally permissible to settle the case if the charged party complied with the health regulations. I held a hearing in Gargeshwari itself and the sanitary inspector inspected and approved the repaired work. I also got a written apology from the leaders of the Labbey community and closed the case. Following this, they accepted my advice and got inoculated and also moved to temporary camps outside the village. After this episode, the Labbeys also behaved with me like every other community in the taluk.</p>
		<p>Although I was successful in imposing my will – and the Government’s authority – on a recalcitrant community, I was not particularly proud of the fact that I had to push my authority to the limit, to the point of harassing an old man. I feel there was also an element of vindictiveness also on my part. So I tried my best to forget the whole episode and largely succeeded. Many years later the story came back to me under amusing circumstances. This was years after my retirement, when I was chatting in the club with some of my friends. In our group was a retired senior officer who had spent the early part of his career as Amildar of T. Narsipur. This was some years after I had served there. He regaled the audience with one of his experiences as Amildar.</p>
		<p>“T. Narsipur you see is a very difficult taluk,” he told us as he began his story. “The Amildar there has to be really tough. When I was serving as Amildar of Narsipur, there was a plague epidemic in the taluk. In those days there used to be a powerful and wealthy leader – a Labbey. He cared for no one, not even the deputy commissioner. We sent for him to undergo plague inoculation…” and so on. He went on with the story, a carbon copy of my own experience with Baba Sahib. He added just one detail; that towards the end of the case he slapped Baba Sahib.</p>
		<p>“Well done sir,” I applauded him. “But why did you have to hit the poor fellow – an old and infirm man?”</p>
		<p>“Just to make my point sir,” he reassured me. “I didn’t strike him hard, just barely touched him.”</p>
		<p>Returning to the plague, it was particularly virulent in the torageri of Moogur. Most of the villagers got inoculated and also left for the camps. But one elderly couple could not. They were taking care of their two orphaned grandchildren. When I took the doctor to their home, both the children were down with the plague with bubo in their armpits. The doctor told me that there was little point in inoculating them as they had already come in contact with the infection. Sending them to camp also posed a hazard to the health of the people. The doctor suggested that they just be allowed to stay where they were.</p>
		<p>The grandparents were listening to our conversation intently. They begged us to give some medicine for the children. We gave them rough ground wheat, a can of powdered milk, and a rupee or so to take care of the children. The elderly couple insisted that we give the children some medicine. The doctor told me in English that there was no medicine to give to the two children as their condition had deteriorated beyond any medical help. So I told the elderly couple, “Make the children drink hot milk mixed with ground wheat. Take the bark of the neem tree there and some sprouting leaves from the bil tree and grind them into a paste and apply it as poultice to the bubo.”</p>
		<p>I said some more encouraging words and left. I forgot all about it. Then, some months later, long after the plague had disappeared, I had to be in Moogur again. The elderly couple and their two grandchildren visited me and prostrated before me. They offered me a coconut and a large bunch of plantains. These were the children we had given up as dead!</p>
		<p>“These children you saved, they are your children,” the grandmother told me. “We did as you told us. Applying ground neem bark and sprouting bil leaves and a diet of milk and ground wheat soup. The bubo burst like a boil and the children recovered. Many people in the village took the bark and leaves from our house. A lot of them were helped but we lost the trees.”</p>
		<p>What to make of it? The two trees had given their lives for a worthy cause. God is great. With his grace, a humble plant can become the nectar of immortality.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
