<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>THE VANISHED RAJ</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-026">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">26 </span> TEMPLES AND COURTS </h1>
		<p><strong><em>Temple politics and court cases. Advocate Ramanna’s unusual theory about a robbery. His need for police protection. Travel conditions a hundred years ago. </em></strong></p>
		<p>It would be entirely appropriate to call Narsipur taluk the abode of temples. Its long history, from the ancient Gangas to the Wodeyar rulers, saw a rich heritage of temple building activity. The presence of so many temples combined with the great natural beauty of the surroundings is bound to inspire spiritual feelings in any sensitive soul. Major temples are located in Muttatti, Gargeshwari, Tirumakudlu, and Mudukutore. These adorn the banks of the Kaveri like jewels on a necklace – like the pendant of the celebrated temples of Talkad. I have already commented on the importance of the Tripura Sundaramma Temple of Moogur.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-026-01">1 </a></sup>The Hoysala temple of Somanathpur is world renowned like the temples of Belur and Halebid, the Taj Mahal, and the Pyramids – as a wonder of architecture and artistry.</p>
		<p>In addition to these major temples, every picturesque corner on the banks of the Kaveri and the Kabini, every forest and grove, and every hilltop, is adorned with a temple or a humble structure that serves as a place of worship. Every one of them has its own special service, a feast, or a festival. I have great affection and respect for our simple people who devoutly visit these places, serving to keep our tradition alive. There are times when I wonder if the education and the experience that I acquired have not harmed me by taking me away from the simple faith of my ancestors. Is it ‘progress’ to impoverish the soul by tempting people with the lure of money and modern education? When I saw simple people in temples, praying to their favorite deity, their voices choked with emotion, it made me wonder about their closeness to God, and how real God seemed to them. The sight of such devotion used to bring me comfort also – like the sound of devotional music from a distance or a breath of cool fresh air. I will describe a scene that I saw and which should give an idea of the beliefs and conduct of these people.</p>
		<p>Sri Mallikarjuna Swami Temple of Mudukotore sits on a small hill by the Kaveri. In addition to Lord Shiva (Mallikarjuna), the temple houses Goddess Bhramarambika, often called ‘the Mother’. The Mother is believed to be compassionate but fierce. Her devotees are expected to be pure in body and spirit; otherwise retribution is swift. This is a firm belief among the devotees. (This is what convinced me that the licentious conduct of the devotees at Mudukutore described by Abbe Dubois in his book could only be a projection of his own state of mind and not the truth. )<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-026-02">2 </a></sup></p>
		<p>As I just observed, I saw a vivid example of the depth of the devotees’ faith. When I was visiting the temple, I saw a woman, the mother of a sick child – of what caste or community, I don’t know – place the child before the idol of the Mother and pour out her grief in a voice choked with emotion:</p>
		<p>“O Mother! You have eyes and ears! Can’t you see the grief burning in my stomach? Can’t you see me and my husband, struggling day and night, washing our hands in tears? Can’t you hear our prayers, O Mother? I have already buried four children. Please leave this one small light burning!”</p>
		<p>She must have heard a reassuring message from the Mother. She went back with a hopeful smile and a happy expression on her face.</p>
		<p>I can recall another episode, an amusing one, bearing testimony to their devotion and faith. At Talkad, there used to be an American missionary; Reverend Patient was his name as I recall. The Lord somehow inspired him to save these ignorant people from eternal darkness— at the Mudukutore jatra of all places. It is after all, at such places that the Devil appearing as a heathen God, casts his evil spell and destroys their soul. Filled with compassion for these damned souls, the good Reverend took his saving mission to Mudukutore.</p>
		<p>I was in Mudukotere on official duty in connection with security and other arrangements for the jatra. One of the Reverend’s associates – a disciple or his cook or someone – came running to me and said excitedly that the people had surrounded his master and about to beat him up. At first I was amused, that “the sun that was to drive away darkness from the souls of heathens was about to be eclipsed.” My amusement soon gave rise to concern; it would bode ill for everyone if a foreign missionary, a white man, were to be seriously hurt by some ignorant people. I hurried to the place of his sermon to try to defuse the situation before it could turn ugly.</p>
		<p>There he was, standing on a small eminence, gesticulating wildly; delivering his sermon in an atrocious accent, as though expecting his gestures to compensate for his poor language. The effort had made him flushed and he was also sweating profusely but otherwise seemed quite unharmed. Still, he seemed relieved to see me. The people around him also became quiet. After making sure the visitor was unhurt, I asked the people what the problem was. An elderly man – his face and forehead covered with sacred ash, with a garland of rudrakshi beads around his neck – came forward and spoke to me in a tone showing some annoyance.</p>
		<p>“Listen to this insolent foreign bastard sir,” he complained. “We came to him thinking that he might have something useful to tell us, or some jewelry or medicines to sell. Instead he began abusing us, addressing us as ‘You sinners!’ What sins have we committed? Are we thieves or robbers? Did we rob his house for him to abuse us like this?”</p>
		<p>Some others around him shouted and nodded in assent. I then asked the Reverend to give me his account.</p>
		<p>“As a result of Adam’s original sin,” he replied, “the entire human family has sinned. As they are human beings, they are also sinners. I began explaining to them that the only way for them to cleanse themselves of their sins is to follow Jesus. Without faith in Jesus they will remain sinners, and there can be no salvation for them. They will burn in hell forever. As I was telling them this they began to raise a commotion.”</p>
		<p>“You are a brave man.” I told him. “Your soul must now be content.</p>
		<p>You are also very fortunate to come out of this unhurt. They know nothing of your scripture or of your ancestor called Adam and his sin. They had no idea of sin until you brought it here. These men and women are sincere devotees on a pilgrimage. Having bathed in the sacred river and offered worship in their favorite temple, they feel blessed. When you call such people ‘sinners’ it is natural for them to get upset. For them, ‘sinner’ is a word of abuse – not used in polite conversation. I have a humble suggestion for you. Put an end to your attempts at saving their souls. Please go somewhere else and try.”</p>
		<p>He took my advice and left.</p>
		<p>Based on my experience hearing court cases, the cases in Narsipur were more numerous, but less complicated than those in Yedatore. But a good number of them used to have lawyers from Mysore and Najangud arguing them. As a result, a large part of my time in the courts was spent hearing criminal cases. At times these cases could turn out to be amusing like the following one.</p>
		<p>The case involved a complaint about one party abusing another in extremely foul language; enough to provoke a fight. Both the parties were Veerashaivas. The abuse was certainly highly insulting. Its gist was that the abuser was familiar with the female members of the victim’s family for several generations. This would have led to a fight under normal circumstances. What stopped it was the initiative of one of the witnesses – one Mastan Sahib. He showered abuse on both parties in words comparable to those that had led to the dispute in the first place, and told them to come to their senses and make peace. This had some effect.</p>
		<p>When I asked the disputants, they agreed. I was disgusted.</p>
		<p>“Have you fellows no shame?” I asked them in disgust. “When your own people abused you and your family, you went to court. But when this stranger, a Muslim, came and abused both of you in the same fashion, you agreed to settle your dispute. Are you happy now? Go settle between yourselves.”</p>
		<p>“Yes my lord!” said Mastan Sahib. “That is exactly what I told them. Why do you fellows, brothers of the same community, want to fight it in court? Settle it among yourselves. But these fools don’t want to listen to an old man like me. They have come to your court – wasting your time and their money.”</p>
		<p>I called the Patel of the village who was in attendance, and had them settle their dispute out of court.</p>
		<p>In another case from my memory, two robbers had broken into a house by making a small hole in the side wall. A dog grabbed hold of the leg of one of the men as he was trying to leave and left a clear wound. The other was a burly fellow, whose shoulders and arms were bruised as he was escaping through the hole. These and other telltale marks allowed the police to arrest these men. They then led the police to the place where they had hidden the stolen goods. They were identified as the goods missing from the house. This allowed the police to build a strong case for prosecution.</p>
		<p>During the hearing, I found that these men seemed to have the support of some wealthy parties. They had brought well-known criminal lawyer D.A. Ramanna from Mysore.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-026-03">3 </a></sup>Because the case for the defense was weak, Ramanna came up with the argument that the police had framed the robbery charge against his innocent clients.</p>
		<p>“Your honor!” Ramanna thundered in his closing argument, “the police themselves patronize some thieves and robbers. These characters steal here and there and furnish things for the police to supplement their low income. To conceal this, the police once in a while plant some of the stolen goods on innocent people and frame them. This has the additional benefit of bringing certificates, promotions, and medals for the police. This way they get to kill two birds – getting additional income and gaining recognition. This is such a case. Everyone the Patel, the police constables, all the way to the police inspector – is involved in this conspiracy. Your honor! My clients are totally innocent.”</p>
		<p>This was his theory. I was thankful that he didn’t include me as one of the culprits. He spoke in his usual loud and verbose manner, flooding the court with a torrent of words. From the intensity with which he argued, putting his heart and soul into this outlandish theory, I guessed that he had just been paid his fee. And from the vehemence of his argument I guessed it to be a large one.</p>
		<p>After the hearing was over, Ramanna asked me, “Sir I have a personal request to make. I have to return to Mysore tonight itself by bullock cart. The night police patrol goes up to Agasara Halli or Megalapur every night. That road is not safe after nightfall. Please instruct the police on patrol to accompany my vehicle."</p>
		<p>The police inspector had been listening to Ramanna’s argument, seething with indignation. As soon as Ramanna requested the police escort, the inspector got up and blurted out, “Why would you want our protection, sir? You just said that the police are thieves and we patronize thieves and robbers. Your clients are honorable, innocent men. They are the ones to protect you.” Next, turning to me, the inspector said, “My lord, I have no objection to releasing his clients on their lawyer’s cognizance so they can protect him on his night journey.”</p>
		<p>I could not hold my laughter. “What do you say Mr. Ramanna?” I asked the lawyer. “Don’t you think it is a sporting offer? The police will release your clients for your protection, if you are ready to sign the bond on their behalf. Are you agreeable to it?”</p>
		<p>Ramanna joined in the general laughter. “This is a court where you argue cases,” said Ramanna, “the other is a highway where you have to save your head.”</p>
		<p>There were no obstacles to providing police protection to travelers that night.</p>
		<p>In those days, travel from Mysore to Narsipur was by bullock carts. Buses were still some twenty years in the future. The Mysore road was known as the home of robbers. The Varuna ridge and the depression immediately after it were notorious as the site of many robberies. For this reason, carts never traveled alone at night; they always moved in convoys of twenty or thirty vehicles. Travelers were especially fearful during the marriage season and the season after harvest. The carts used to cross the rivers at Narsipur and join the carts coming from other routes at Gargeshwari and proceed to Mysore only when their numbers were large enough to form a convoy. They would usually begin the journey around ten at night and reach the Mysore tollgate at dawn.</p>
		<p>After I took over as Amildar, I heard that there was a robbery at the Varuna ridge in Mysore taluk. Some time later I received report of a shower of stones and rocks on carts traveling within my taluk boundary. This was several days before the wedding season and the harvest season. It made me furious.</p>
		<p>I felt that such organized robberies could not take place without the connivance of at least some of the cart drivers. I saw also a pattern in the robberies. First, there would be rumors to the effect that a group of robbers was operating in the area; this would soon be followed by a hit on those carts carrying marriage parties and those returning from paddy sales in the Mysore markets immediately after harvest. The reason, of course, was these passengers would be carrying jewelry and cash. This required inside knowledge. And individuals in the best position to provide this intelligence were cart drivers themselves. It might be pointed out that the drivers hired to run the service were mostly Labbeys from Gargeshwari and surroundings areas; many of them had a reputation of being involved in criminal activities.</p>
		<p>To deal with this, I worked with the officials of neighboring Mysore taluk and set up procedures for the registration of carts and cart drivers. The policeman on duty at the checkpoint of the tollgate would make a note of the names of the men driving the bullock carts to and from Mysore and get their signatures along with a record of the time at which the convoy left the checkpoint. This was usually at ten o’clock at night. Any cart arriving later would not be allowed to leave; it would have to stop for the night and leave only in the morning. I also got the deputy commissioner’s (DC) sanction for a special beat police to accompany each convoy – one from Mysore, the other from Narsipur. The two policemen would meet at midpoint, sign a register and return to the starting post with the convoy and report to the inspector.</p>
		<p>The system worked extremely well and virtually eliminated robberies on the highway. To check the efficacy of the system, the Amildar of Mysore and I travelled with the convoys a few times without giving any prior warning.</p>
		<p>I broke my own rule once and nearly came to grief. My wife and I had been to Mysore and I decided to return the same night. When I reached the checkpoint at the tollgate, there were only about four or five carts – too small to travel as a convoy. But I told the policeman on duty that I was the chief law enforcement officer and would take the carts with me and take care of their security. I also showed him that I had my revolver and my repeater rifle with me. I signed the register and left. Whether I was in a hurry to reach Narsipur or if it was just bravado on my part, I cannot now recall.</p>
		<p>It was a mistake. We had traveled about seven or eight miles when the driver whispered to me that he could see some men moving about behind the trees by the roadside. He was afraid they might try to rob us. I took out my loaded rifle and cocked it, ready to fire. Then a loud voice from behind the trees called out, “Stop the cart!”</p>
		<p>I told the driver to unyoke the oxen and get under the cart and stay still. The carts following us came up and joined us, forming a single mass. I rested the rifle on the cross rope in the front portion of the cart and waited. I expected that the robbers would approach us from the front. My rifle was loaded with five cartridges in the magazine (and my revolver had six). I was not planning to shoot to kill, but if anyone approached, my intention was to shoot him in the leg and catch him and through him catch the whole gang.</p>
		<p>This did not require much courage on my part, only a cool head. Most robbers and thieves are cowards by temperament. I recall a similar incident from my childhood when we were traveling from Mysore to Shimoga.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-026-04">4 </a></sup>My father had been posted to Shimoga and the whole family had to travel the one hundred and seventy odd miles by bullock cart as there was no was no train to Shimoga in those days. As we approached Arsikere – it was called Kalla Arasikere (Thieves’ Arsikere) in those days – it was well into the night. We heard some shouting accompanied by stones thrown at us. My father jumped out of the cart with a loaded double-barreled shotgun in hand. Telling the driver and the passengers not worry, my father fired a shot in the direction of the noise. As soon as they heard the gun report, the robbers disappeared into the night.</p>
		<p>Returning to my trip from Mysore to Narispur, the same thing happened. From our behavior they must have sensed that I was prepared for them – or it might be a trap to catch them. No one came. We waited for the convoy from Mysore and covered the rest of the distance to Mysore in their company.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
