<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>THE VANISHED RAJ</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-001">
<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">27 THE GODMAN COMETH </h1>
<p><strong><em>A holy man claiming unusual powers arrives in Narsipur. A demonstration of making gold. A pious police officer fails to convert a thief. </em></strong></p>
<p>Were our grandfathers more gullible than we are, or were charlatans and impostors of yore more crafty than those plying their trade today? This is not easy to answer, but I will next relate my encounter with one who was more than ordinarily skilled.</p>
<p>One day I heard that a holy man of extraordinary powers, capable of turning base metals into gold, had arrived in Narsipur. He was said to be living in solitude, frequenting places like abandoned old temples, solitary woods by the river, and other places far away from human habitation. He was reputed to spend only a day or two at one location and appear in large temples when no one was around and offer service by reciting Vedic chants. I also heard that some people managed to locate him by the smoke emanating from a sacred fire and obtained his blessings by offering him food and money. He was said to be totally indifferent to money and other material things. Whatever he received from his devotees he gave away to the poor – so I heard.</p>
<p>I am a skeptic by nature; perhaps it is due to my experience as lawyer and government administrator. Outside of stories found in our mythologies and epics, my knowledge of saints and selfless heroes is very limited. In my life of over seventy years, I have seen one, perhaps two or three persons that I would unhesitatingly call saintly. So, when I heard of the activities of this unusual character, I told the police to keep a watch on this modern day saint.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-027-01">1 </a></sup>They seemed to have done their job but a police uniform doesn’t change a man’s nature. I kept hearing stories about the man’s saintliness and supernatural powers even from the police.</p>
<p>“He is truly a saint, sir,” one policeman told me. “Whatever money he gets, he gives it all away to the poor. When asked ‘Why do you do this? Why not keep at least some for yourself?’ the great man says, ‘If I need I can make gold. I can make all the nine precious stones. But these are material things – like mud and clay. God has given me air and water. That is enough for me,’ he said.”</p>
<p>“So, he is one of those extraordinary sages who can subsist on nothing but air and water,” I thought. I had read about them in some ancient works, but here was one in flesh and blood. Along with such naïve accounts by gullible policemen, there were also a few substantial reports. There was one about his taking money from a wealthy Brahmin landowner for ingredients for making gold and staying as his guest for several days. There was another about his visit to a village leader for some rituals to locate a hidden treasure. I also heard that he was especially compassionate towards widows and other women without guardians. This made me send for the police inspector.</p>
<p>“You should make every effort to unmask this impostor before it stops being a joke,” I told the inspector. “If it goes on like this it won’t be long before we are held up to ridicule. Don’t leave it to junior policemen who seem to believe every cock-and-bull story put out by this man. I want you to take personal charge of this case.”</p>
<p>This turned up the heat on the holy man, which seems to have scared him a bit. One day when I was visiting the Gunja Narasimhaswamy temple, I saw a stranger in saffron clothes seated in the inside portion of the temple. He was a red-faced, burly man in his forties, with long black hair and a flowing beard. I guessed him to be the holy man who was sanctifying my taluk with his presence.</p>
<p>“This body is nourished by more than just air and water,” I said to myself.</p>
<p>As I was leaving, he made a sign for me to come to him. I called out to him to come to me if he wanted. He stood up and came to me and asked speaking in Tamil, “I need to see you in private to discuss something. When can I come?”</p>
<p>“I am leaving for home,” I told him. “You can come by after about half an hour.”</p>
<p>I reached home and waited for the man with intense anticipation. The holy man showed up in about thirty minutes. I had him shown into my study and offered him a seat. After a few minutes of silence, I finally asked him, “Why did you want to see me?”</p>
<p>He replied in Tamil, assuming a very pompous manner.</p>
<p>“The police in your taluk,” he said, “seem to have no sense of propriety. Paying heed to rumors and innuendo of small people, they are needlessly harassing me. I am a man of God and bear no ill will towards any living being. But their behavior reflects poorly on your reputation and the dignity of the office you hold. They are but small men, but you – you are the scion of a distinguished family. You should set them on the right path and save yourself from the unnecessary disgrace that may fall upon you.”</p>
<p>I was infuriated by his presumption. I could also see that his speaking in Tamil was pure affectation. I have lived in the Tamil country where I studied and practiced law. I could see that he was a local speaking the corrupted Tamil of the Srivaishnava Brahmins, native to Mysore.</p>
<p>“There is no need for such high flown rhetoric,” I told him, speaking in Kannada. “Your problems are with the police. What has my family reputation got to do with it? Your Tamil suggests that you are a local— a Srivaishnava Brahmin from these parts and not an outsider. Your physical appearance does not suggest a life of extreme austerity that you are credited with. Is it true that you can create gold? Is it true that you can locate hidden treasures?”</p>
<p>His Holiness descended from his lofty perch, condescending to speak in the local language which he spoke like a native.</p>
<p>“It is the belief of students of modern science – like yourself – that creating gold is impossible,” he said. “There is little to be gained by arguing with you about the matter. Many villagers approach me believing that I possess some supernatural powers. I am not responsible for what they do and what they believe. But one thing I can tell you. I happen to possess complete mastery of the ancient science of Ayurveda. I can prepare for you an extraordinary potion containing pearls, gold, coral, secret essences, and other precious ingredients. If you take it for fifteen days, you’ll see its effect yourself. It’ll cost you only a hundred rupees for fifteen days’ supply.”</p>
<p>“Though I have never been ill myself,” I replied with a laugh, “I have known a few other experts like you. One of them was Krishna Pandit from my ancestral village of Devanahalli. He was known as Krishna Pandit the Lame. Our local poet Narayana Shastri wrote a couplet about him that went like this:</p>
<p>“ Mighty Krishna Pandit the Lame,</p>
<p>Sent patients to Heaven and acquired fame.”</p>
<p>“There was another in Bangalore, near Siddikatte, whose name I forget. He and his elder brother were renowned for dispatching people with their medicines. They were always generously rewarded by the heirs who inherited the wealth of the departed. The two brothers are now living as guests of the Government – in the Bangalore Jail. Does your treatment also relieve me of my worldly concerns?”</p>
<p>He ignored my sarcasm and said that what he had to offer was a preparation more potent than any aphrodisiac known. It would increase my sexual potency a hundred-fold. I could not control myself.</p>
<p>“Your Holiness!” I burst out. “I am just a Brahmin householder supporting a wife and two daughters on a government salary. What would I do with a hundred-fold increase in my potency? The Nizam of Hyderabad, the Sultan of Turkey, and other such princes and potentates with vast harems – they are the ones who could use your talents. You may be a master of the occult arts, but you don’t seem to know who your customers are.”</p>
<p>Then I became serious and gave him a stern warning.</p>
<p>“Enough of this,” I said. “Do you expect me to believe such nonsense? I don’t know what exactly you have been up to so far. But if I hear of any harm to anyone from you, you can expect to feel the full weight of my authority. I don’t care where you are from but you better leave my taluk and return to your place. The air here – you are said to subsist on air – may soon not agree with you. Get out!”</p>
<p>Within a few days of this meeting, a leading merchant and landowner of Talkad by name Shivabasava Devaru came to see me. I asked him the reason for his visit. With great reluctance he told the following story. Here is the story in his own words, with Mr. Devaru speaking in first person:</p>
<p>“A few days ago a poor Brahmin of my acquaintance – Koti Kanyadana Tatachar – came to see me. After much persuasion he told me that a famous holy man from Melkote<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-027-02">2 </a></sup>was staying with him as his guest. He said that this man had the secret of making gold but he first needed a hundred rupees for ingredients.</p>
<p>“Should I give the money to him?” Tatachar asked me. “You are a trusted friend. You know my condition – a poor Vedic with little knowledge of the world. I need your advice.”</p>
<p>I felt sorry for the poor Brahmin. He was from a good family, had lived well in the past but was now mired in poverty with a large family to support. I told him to bring the holy man over.</p>
<p>“He is a proud sort of man,” Tatachar said. “He doesn’t like to go to see anyone.”</p>
<p>So I went to see him myself. I asked him if it was true that he could make gold. He told me he could, but he first had to perform several rituals like Hiranya-homa, puja, and so on. He also needed some ingredients for making gold.</p>
<p>“You don’t have to take me at my word,” he assured me. “I will give you a demonstration. I can first prepare a small quantity of gold. Once you are convinced we can make tons of it.”</p>
<p>It piqued my curiosity. I told him to make a tola of gold. If he convinced me, I could ask him to make more.</p>
<p>He demanded a hundred rupees for expenses. When I asked him to account for it he named miscellaneous items costing about twenty rupees and eighty rupees for something he called ‘Gandharva Bhasma’ or Angel’s Ash.</p>
<p>“What is this Angel’s Ash?” I asked him.</p>
<p>“Ah! I cannot tell you that,” he said coyly. “It is a secret known only to me and my teacher.”</p>
<p>I let go at that and gave him a hundred rupees.</p>
<p>He returned a couple of days later and said he was ready to make gold. He would be setting up the fire altar in the small shed in my garden. I made all the necessary arrangements. His altar was a simple affair, consisting of an iron brazier surrounded by a row of bricks. He started a charcoal fire and reciting some chants threw some salts and pieces of copper wire into it. He then pulled out a snuffbox from his waist and took out a few pinches of a coarse gray powder, which he threw it into the fire. I immediately saw through his trick.</p>
<p>As a boy, I had found that rubbing mercury on gold foil produces such gray granules of gold amalgam. When placed in fire, mercury evaporates leaving the gold behind. So this gold amalgam was his Angel’s Ash! His plan was to gain the person’s confidence with this simple chemistry experiment and then steal him blind.</p>
<p>This is exactly what happened. When the fire cooled, a small quantity of gold was left in a corner.</p>
<p>“Do you see it?” said the scoundrel in a triumphant tone.</p>
<p>“Of course I see it Your Holiness,” I replied.” I paid for it, so I’ll take it.”</p>
<p>I then took him inside the house, into my strong room with the vault. I opened the vault and showed him four bags filled with gold coins.</p>
<p>“You poor holy bastard!” I said to him. “What do you know about making gold? Here is the gold I have made – all done without cheating a soul. Now get out of town. Else I’ll personally deliver you to the police.”</p>
<p>Then, feeling that a scoundrel like this should not be allowed to go around cheating our people, I decide to come and report to your lordship”.</p>
<p>I thanked Mr. Devaru for his public-spirited act and asked him to repeat the story to the police inspector whom I sent for. Devaru repeated the story but left out the detail about showing the impostor the bags of gold coins in the vault. We both felt there was nothing to be gained by advertising his wealth.</p>
<p>“This man is getting a little overactive,” I told the inspector. “You should also increase your activity.”</p>
<p>We still didn’t have enough evidence to charge him with a crime and arrest him. But he soon overreached himself and fell into our hands. It came about as follows.</p>
<p>Tatachar, the poor Brahmin who had brought the holy man to Devaru, misinterpreted the whole proceedings. He believed that Devaru was using his wealth to get the holy man to make tons and tons of gold for him. This made him despondent. He felt it was only his poverty that prevented him from reaping the benefits of the holy man’s skills.</p>
<p>“These are the fruits of poverty,” he bewailed to his wife. “If only I had the capital to finance his gold-making, I could become a millionaire. Now the rich Devaru will use him to become richer. You and I will remain forever poor.”</p>
<p>Tatachar heaped scorn on his impoverished state. Moved by his anguish, his gentle wife gave him her gold waistband – a gift from her mother – and told him to sell it and use it as capital for his gold-making enterprise. Tatachar took it and handed it to the holy man. The scoundrel sensed that the place was getting a little too hot for him and took to his heels. The police who had kept a watch on him caught up with him, as he was about to cross the taluk boundary near Belakawadi. By then he had shaved off his beard and long hair and exchanged the saffron robes of the holy man for the unprepossessing attire of an ordinary Vedic Brahmin. He had about five hundred rupees on him when arrested.</p>
<p>Investigations revealed that he had a criminal record, having served two or three prison sentences. He had the all qualifications necessary to be called a K.D. (known depredator) – or a felon with a record of convictions. Trying a man of his distinction lay beyond the scope of my court. So his case was heard in the court of the subdivision officer (SDO), presided over by none other than the SDO V.N. Iyer. The SDO was distressed that a man of such obvious learning was engaged in deceiving innocent people. He thought it was worth trying to reform him. In his court, the hearing took a strange turn.</p>
<p>The arguments between the prisoner and the judge (V.N. Iyer) before the case was committed to sessions court was said to be very interesting, with both parties quoting profusely from ancient works and scriptures like the ‘Mahabharata’, ‘Bhagavata’, the ‘Gita’ and the ‘Upanishads’. Lawyers, policemen, and others present in the court, were spellbound by the learning and erudition displayed by the participants— especially the prisoner. They had the feeling of being present at a great centre of learning like Benares or Kanchi, or in an assembly of sages in an ancient hermitage. When the prisoner was finally transferred to the Mysore jail, inspector Channa Raj Urs told me that the entire police force was in tears. It was probably an exaggeration, but I felt it had a grain of truth. Anyway it ended the career of this scholar-impostor.</p>
<p>This desire to convert criminals into saints is probably as old as mankind. Such stories melt the hearts (and brains) of good people, but rarely have the desired effect. I too had one such experience while Amildar of Yedatore. After a great deal of difficulty we had managed to apprehend a well-known undesirable by name Ramalinga. As he was known to be a slippery customer, I handed him over to a Dafedar by name Parijat Narasimhachar, instructing him to take the prisoner to Yedatore and place him in the security of the sub-jail. I thought no more about it as I had to be away from the taluk for a few days.</p>
<p>When I returned to Yedatore, I was told that Ramalinga had escaped by assaulting the Jamedar as he was being taken to the sub-jail. This surprised me. Jamedar Narasimhachar was a large, powerfully-built man while Ramalinga was a small, wiry fellow, handcuffed and shackled as he was being taken to Yedatore. The Jamedar also had a police constable with him. This made me suspicious. I sent for Narasimhachar and asked him for a complete account.</p>
<p>“The prisoner was ill at the time of arrest,” Narasimhachar told me, “and also suffered some injuries in the scuffle as he was being arrested. He fainted on the way to the sub-jail due to weakness. I sent the constable to a nearby village for some water and also a cart so the prisoner could be transported in comfort.”</p>
<p>This was most unwise, but worse was to come. The prisoner next complained that his leg shackles were causing cramps and begged Narasimhachar to remove them, suggesting that they could be put back once the cramp subsided. The Jamedar, a man of exemplary compassion, dutifully obliged. To his utter disgust, the prisoner, in gross violation of trust, simply took to his heels. Narasimhachar was deeply hurt by this deplorable show of ingratitude. He gave chase but the prisoner rapidly put distance between the two and disappeared into the wilderness.</p>
<p>“Victory and defeat are in the hands of God,” said Narasimhachar philosophically.</p>
<p>I was annoyed but also felt sorry for this elderly saint in uniform. There was nothing to be done now, but I was in for a surprise. The same day, when I was in court hearing the case, the escaped prisoner Ramalinga presented himself to me and said, “Here I am my lord! What do you want me to do?”</p>
<p>“I heard that you escaped by assaulting the Jamedar,” I replied, taken aback by the turn of events. “What made you come here and surrender?”</p>
<p>“I wasn’t planning to escape,” he explained. “My wife is expecting, so where would I go? But along the way, this police priest bored me to death with his sermons. When I couldn’t stand his talk any longer I gave him the slip. The poor fellow, he himself removed the shackles allowing me to run for cover. I had the handcuffs broken when I reached my village.”</p>
<p>“What you did, escaping from arrest, is a violation of the law. Let that be for the moment. What did the Jamedar tell you that you found so impossible to bear? Was it so bad that you had to run away at great risk?”</p>
<p>“Listen my lord!” said Ramalinga with a sigh. “‘Your present miserable condition is the result of bad karma in your previous life,’ the Jamedar told me. ‘It is still not too late if you place your trust in Lord Krishna and repent.’ ‘It is a long way between Lord Krishna and people like me,’ I told him. ‘But I do give a few coins and a coconut at the temple and a small fee to the priest when I have the money.’ ‘O you sinner!’ the Jamedar said. ‘That is not enough. I’ll tell you what you need to do’.”</p>
<p>“He told me, and he told me. Listen my lord, and he kept telling me. We reached Melur, and he still kept telling me. We reached Ankanahalli, he was still telling me. He was like a torrential rain that won’t let up for a minute. He said I should give up everything I do and sit in one place and spend day and night chanting ‘Rama, Rama, and Krishna, Krishna.’ ‘All well and good,’ I asked him. ‘But who is going to take care of my wife and children?’ Jamedar said, ‘If you follow what I say, God will take care of your family.’ ”</p>
<p>Then Ramalinga told me how he managed to escape. It differed somewhat from Narasimhachar’s account.</p>
<p>“I told the Jamedar that I would follow his advice,” Ramalinga continued, “and asked his permission to go into the bushes to relieve myself. He agreed and removed my shackles. I went into the bushes and then just ran away. The police tried to follow me, but he was not a man who could catch me. This, my lord, is the story of my escape.”</p>
<p>I turned to Narasimhachar and said, “You see Jamedar, when you retire from the force you can exchange your uniform for saintly robes and follow the Gita, the Bhagavata, and other holy works. But as long as you are in the service we have to go by the Penal Code and police rules and regulations.”</p>
<p>“My good fellow!” I told Ramalinga, “You say your wife is expecting a child. Try to be decent and stay out of jail until she has her baby and is fully recovered. Then, if you still haven’t learnt anything from the good Jamedar’s advice, come back to me. I’ll send you to a more suitable place.”</p>
<p>I gave him a suspended sentence, asking him to report regularly to the police.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
