<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>THE VANISHED RAJ</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-028">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">28 </span> TEMPLES AND POLITICS </h1>
		<p><strong><em>Rama Rao gets entangled in a dispute over temple protocol. The generosity of a famous seer. A troublesome clerk. Excavating some historic temples. Kantha Raje Urs shows his nobility. </em></strong></p>
		<p>I have great love and respect for our temples, especially those that have stood the test of time, commanding the devotion of the people for many generations. When people attend temple services, at least during the time they participate in it, their hearts are pure and souls free. They approach their maker with purity of heart, which allows their better qualities to come to the surface. The fragrance of their purity tends to persist like a musical tone stored on a gramophone record, constantly filling the temple, resulting in an atmosphere of permanent sanctity and purity. When we approach such places of worship in the proper frame of mind, the sanctity and the purity of the place enter our hearts and souls and make us better persons in the long run. This is my firm belief based on long experience. Whenever I visit a place, I always visit a nearby temple at the time of service. Even in those days, I would go before the idol of the Lord, who would stand before me as a concrete image and not just as an abstract object of my devotion, and pray:</p>
		<p>“O Lord! Bless me, my people, my country, and bring happiness and prosperity to the whole creation.” <sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-028-01">1 </a></sup></p>
		<p>My story so far probably makes it obvious that I hail from a Madhva-Deshastha Brahmin family of Vedic tradition. Although I respect my tradition, following it by choice, I am not sectarian in my day-to-day dealings with people. I hope this is also clear from my story. And yet, I once had to face the charge of favoring a Madhva religious figure – against the Maharaja’s own religious teacher no less! It came about as follows.</p>
		<p>The most important festival of T. Narsipur is the ‘Rathotsava’ (chariot festival) of the Gunja Narasimhaswamy Temple. This was not just a local festival; it attracted devotees from all parts of the taluk and beyond. At one time it must have been popular among people from all castes and sects of the area. Even in my time most communities used to participate except for some Veerashaiva sects.</p>
		<p>The Gunja Narasimhaswamy Temple is a public institution administered by the state. It has a large staff on small salaries, but capable of big mischief. About three-fourths of them are Srivaishnavas belonging to two different sects. Although they fought among themselves over trivial things, they were united in claiming the special privileges due even to the most minor priests of their sect. The result was that even elderly men and women, including Brahmins, had to wait their turn until these self-important men had finished their service and meals. Only when I visited the temple, as the Maharaja’s representative, would I be served tirtha immediately after the royal priest. Then, out of respect for his age, the elderly teacher Nagavadhani would be served followed in order by Krishna Shastri and Venkatarama Shastri. This was the protocol.</p>
		<p>One year, a few days before the annual Rathotsava, I received a communication from the Madhwa Pontiff of Vyasaraya Math of Sosale intimating that he would like to be present at the festival. His representative met me and asked if there was any objection on my part. I was, of course, delighted. I was sure the devotees attending the festival would also feel honored to see a major religious figure in their midst. So, I sent back a reply saying that we would all be honored by his presence. It was a public function anyway; anyone, including a religious head, was free to attend.</p>
		<p>This was my initial, if impulsive reaction. Upon a little reflection, it struck me that there was a difference between just anyone attending and a major public figure, especially a religious head paying a ceremonial visit. The latter would have to be accorded special treatment. Common devotees come to offer to worship, while a religious head comes to receive honors including worship. Sectarian differences also come into play. Most devotees don’t care about these niceties, but as the official of a state-owned temple, I could not afford to be indifferent. If the Pontiff of the Maharaja’s own religious sect were also to attend, how was I to handle the protocol? To settle this, I sent for my supply officer and the temple manager. Both were Srivaishnava Brahmins, and also intelligent, experienced men. They gave me the following opinion:</p>
		<p>“Should the Pontiff of Parakal Math (the Maharaja’s teacher or the Rajaguru) and any other pontiff attend the festival the Rajaguru receives the honor of the first service. If only the representatives of the two religious sects are present in person, the Rajaguru’s representative receives the first honor. But if the Rajaguru’s representative and the Pontiff of any other sect should be present, the Pontiff receives the first honor above any representative. In other words, every Pontiff takes precedence over any representative as far as the temple is concerned. This is the standard protocol.”</p>
		<p>This seemed eminently logical, one that should satisfy any sensible person. So I gave directions to follow this procedure with regard to the Sosale Pontiff who had expressed his wish to attend the festival. If I had not taken such a decision but allowed scope for arguments by scholars and theologians, I would have had on my hands a marathon dispute that was unlikely to be settled in my lifetime.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-028-02">2</a></sup> So what I had done was not only logical but also practical – at least as I saw it. But I had not counted on the ego of petty religious officials with their capacity for mischief.</p>
		<p>To be on safe ground, I had a written report on the procedure to be followed, prepared and signed by the temple manager. On the following day, the day of the festival, the Pontiff left Sosale by boat and arrived at half past eight in the morning along with his retinue. I received His Holiness at the ghat where his boat docked. I took him by the hand and presented the customary honor s due to him from me as the Maharaja’s representative in the taluk. I next led him to the temple, surrounded by thousands of inquisitive devotees. He was old and infirm, so I had to practically carry him all the way up the steps. I stayed with him in the temple and also near the chariot with the idol as he performed his pooja. After the completion of his duties, I took him back to his boat and saw him off as he left for Sosale. It was past eleven by the time he left. There were no objections from anyone during his presence; instead, the devotees were genuinely happy.</p>
		<p>It was now time for the chariot procession to begin. Enthusiastic devotees were there by the thousands. Hundreds of them came forward, looking for a chance to pull the chariot. I was also there with a few of my friends to start off the proceedings by ceremonially pulling the chariot rope. As the sun was strong, we were standing under a small tree waiting for the signal to begin. Just then we heard a commotion. Someone seemed to be standing in front of the chariot, trying to stop it from being pulled. I sent the police officer with me – one Jamedar Shamanna – to go and report on the problem.</p>
		<p>“It is getting quite warm,” I told him. “Many, including women and children, are waiting for the procession to start. It will take nearly two hours for the chariot to reach its destination. We cannot delay it any further. Please go and make sure that there are no obstacles to starting the procession.”</p>
		<p>The Jamedar left for the place. But the commotion, instead of subsiding, got only worse. So I went there myself. I saw an assembly of Brahmins from surrounding towns and villages – Narsipur, Sosale, Gargeshwari, and others – all talking at the same time. At the centre of the assembly was a clerk working for the Parakal Math – the seat of the Maharaja’s Pontiff or the Rajaguru. (His name was Narasimhachari as I remember.) He claimed to be the representative of the Rajaguru. They became quiet when they saw me.</p>
		<p>“To whom did you present the first honor?” the clerk asked me.</p>
		<p>I turned to the temple manager and said, “Tell him.”</p>
		<p>The temple manager explained why the Pontiff of Sosale had been given the first honor.</p>
		<p>“So, the Subedar’s Guru takes precedence over the Maharaja’s Guru</p>
		<p>– the Rajaguru!”</p>
		<p>I checked my rising anger and said, “The Rajaguru was not here in person, but the Pontiff of Sosale was. He is not my Guru for I belong to the Uttaradhi order. But he is a venerable elderly figure with many followers in the land, worthy of honor and worship. It was proper that he should be honored before anyone else. I don’t have to answer anything to this clerk. I am only bringing the facts to the attention of the public and the people present here.”</p>
		<p>Following this, I briefly explained the reasoning as given by the temple manager. Some said it was proper that a venerable sage should be honored wherever he goes.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-028-03">3 </a></sup>But some others insisted that whatever rights a man has, they belong to his representative also. As example, they cited that the tax is paid to the Government, though it may be collected by the Patel or the Shanbog. We are not asked to pay taxes separately to each official.</p>
		<p>I thought this an absurd argument, an exercise in sophistry.</p>
		<p>“If you feel that the temple manager’s decision was improper,” I told them, “please file a complaint. We can examine the records for precedent and also consult scholars and scriptures. We can set the rules for the future. But for now the festival must go on. Please clear the way so the chariot can be drawn without further delay.”</p>
		<p>Most people agreed and moved away from the path. But the clerk pulled himself up to his full height and said, “No sir! It is a religious festival only when proper procedures are followed. Otherwise, it is just a mob.”</p>
		<p>“Why don’t you tell us what you feel is proper?” I asked him.</p>
		<p>“The procession should be stopped,” he replied. “The chariot should be taken back to the starting point. The chariot should be re-anointed by the temple priests. The necessary honor and service should be offered to the Rajaguru’s representative (meaning himself). Only then can the procession begin.”</p>
		<p>The insolence of this petty official made me lose my temper.</p>
		<p>“What rubbish!” I shouted back at him. “You seem to be without any sense of shame. Is this the Lord’s festival, or a clerk’s festival? Get out of this place!”</p>
		<p>Then I turned to the police Jamedar and said sternly, “Remove this fellow for obstructing a public function.”</p>
		<p>The clerk left in a huff, without waiting for police hospitality. A few – very few – joined him in the walkout. Some others, mostly temple workers, who seemed to be vacillating, got to their stations as soon as my eyes fell on them. The chariot festival went on grandly without any more trouble. The people also participated with their usual joy and enthusiasm.</p>
		<p>When I went back home, I thought about the whole situation calmly. It was clear that I had placed myself in an awkward position. What I had done was both right and expedient. But the Pontiff of Sosale (Sri Vyasaraya) is a Madhwa sage. Although I belong to a different sub-sect (Uttaradhi), I too am a Madhwa Brahmin and hence he is honored by me. But these fine distinctions will not be apparent to outsiders or they may not care. They may see it simply as a Madhva official using his authority to present honors to a Madhwa seer ahead of the representative of the Maharaja’s Guru. This of course was the impression that was sought to be created by the opposing camp.</p>
		<p>I felt that both law and tradition were on my side. I had also the records and the signed statement of the temple authorities. I decided that I would prepare a detailed report and submit it with supporting documents to my superiors. But there was no telling what mischief my adversaries might create with their lurid tales. So, I took steps to ensure that they would not reach my superior officers and prejudice them with their stories before my report could reach them. I left for Mysore the same evening and also made arrangements so that Narasimhachari (Rajaguru’s clerk) would not be able to get transportation to go to Mysore until the following day. I am not going to defend what I did. All is fair in love and war – it is said. My goal was only to prevent false stories from being circulated before I had a chance to present my side based on facts recorded in the official report.</p>
		<p>Upon reaching Mysore, I saw the deputy commissioner (DC) Kantha Raje Urs and gave him a detailed report, leaving out nothing. I told him that I had full confidence that what I had done was just and proper. But I was also concerned that my position might be misunderstood in the palace, leading to the Maharaja’s displeasure. This could hardly help me, for I had always held the goodwill of our rulers to be my greatest asset.</p>
		<p>Kantha Raje Urs agreed with me. He told me not to worry about any unhappiness on the part of the royal family. He suggested that I should go and see the Maharaja’s Pontiff (of Parkal) and explain my actions to him. This would avoid causing him any distress. Then he thought over for a little while and said, “Those trying to explain their innocence before being charged with any guilt will only be accusing themselves. So, it is better that I see His Holiness of Parkal myself and explain the whole thing to him. I’ll let you know what comes of it.”</p>
		<p>I returned to Narsipur. Soon, a campaign of anonymous petitions began. There was a flood of anonymous letters addressed to everyone – the Maharaja, the Queen Mother, the Diwan, the DC and the subdivision officer (SDO). These seemed to originate in every town and village in the taluk, while a few of them came from such places as Tirupati, Melkote, Kanchi and Sriranga. According to them, I surpassed Ravana in my arrogance; as a tormentor of the innocent, I was the equal of Hiranyakashipu. God had created me by taking a drop of blood out of each and every one of the monsters and tyrants filling the pages of our history and tradition. These petitions were all of one kind in language and style. It was apparent that they were the handiwork of a single master poet. They all eventually made their way to the DC’s office. He sent me a few and consigned the rest to permanent oblivion in the DC’s office records.</p>
		<p>What ultimately saved the day was the fair-mindedness of the Pontiff of Parkal Math – the Rajaguru. He issued a public statement supporting me and my action. He said that to do otherwise – presenting the honor to his clerk before the Sosale Pontiff who was present in person – would have amounted to disrespect to a brother Pontiff whom he held in the highest regard. He thanked and complimented me for my sense of duty and respect for tradition. His generosity filled me with respect and gratitude.</p>
		<p>After all the smoke had cleared, I sent for the clerk Narasimhachari. He tried to evade me, but I made sure that he was served the summons when he was in town.</p>
		<p>“You see, no harm came to me from all the anonymous petitions you wrote,” I told him. “If I am really as evil as your letters make me out to be, I could easily have destroyed you by now. I am not vindictive by nature, but I don’t like people who create a foul atmosphere. If you don’t reform yourself, if you insist on raising a stink, I can send some sewage cleaners who will take care you? Be careful!”</p>
		<p>I accompanied him all the way to the main door of the building and told him, “Please don’t forget what I said Mr. Narasimhachar.” I had no more trouble from him.</p>
		<p>I had a much more pleasant experience in restoring the five ancient temples in the T. Narsipur taluk. Its results also proved more lasting. The great jatra relating to the pancha-linga remains vivid in my memory even after all these years. The Mysore Gazetteer states that this event comes about once every twenty years. The Gazetteer that makes this statement is not the beautiful, original Gazetteer by Lewis Rice, but the bloated misshapen monstrosity produced by the quack that succeeded him.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-028-04">4 </a></sup>It is inaccurate and shows complete ignorance of the place’s history and tradition. The actual date of the event is determined by the position of the stars in the Hindu month of Kartika. This auspicious event can come about once in two or three years; or it may also take twenty or even thirty years. When the right configuration of stars made the Pancha-linga Mela possible when I was Amildar, there had not been one for some thirty years.</p>
		<p>This great event was expected to attract devotees from all over India, especially South India. Those old enough to remember the previous jatra told me that the number of visitors would approach two or even three lakhs. Already, a month or two before the event, there was intense business activity in villages within four or five miles of the temples – villages like Talkad, Muduktore, Hemmige, Mavinahalli, and others. There were people and agents looking for shops, living accommodation, fields, and farms. It became clear to me that the jatra would touch every resident of the taluk regardless of rank and social position. It would mean pilgrimage for the devotees, business for traders, additional revenue for the Government, opportunities for thieves and vagabonds of all description, a fertile source for infectious diseases, and additional burden for government officials especially the Amildar. There was an upsurge of enthusiasm all over the taluk that cut across castes and creed. I was approached by the leaders of large villages offering me facilities to camp in their village for the event.</p>
		<p>Although I had overseen many jatras, this one was going to be exceptional, surpassing all others in size and importance. I felt it would test my ability as an official and even determine my future prospects in the Government. I felt also it was my duty to ensure that the jatra was completed without a hitch. This would bring me accolades from my superiors; above all it would bring me the satisfaction of having successfully discharged a major responsibility.</p>
		<p>The panhca-lingas or the five Shiva temples are the following: Vaidyeshwara, Maruleshwara, and Pataleshwara located in Talkad; Vijayeshwara located in the riverside village of Vijayapur; and the Mallikarjuna Temple on the Mudukutore hill. The pilgrims would begin by bathing in the lake adjacent to the Vaidyeshwara Temple in Talkad and worship in the three temples, and bathe again. From there, they would proceed to the Vijayeshwara Temple in Vijayapur, some three miles from Talkad, and then return to Talkad for another dip. On the final leg of their pilgrimage, they would visit the Mudukutore Mallikarjuna Temple after which they would head to Talkad again for the final dip in the lake that would conclude the pilgrimage.</p>
		<p>To prepare for this elaborate pilgrimage involving lakhs of visitors, I got together all the village leaders as well as the caste and community leaders from the surrounding areas to thrash out the problems we might face. The main issue was the selection and co-ordination of the various applications for space and living arrangements. These leaders saw me not as an official, but as a friend and colleague interested in working with them. This made them speak candidly, which was a matter of great satisfaction to me. I gave them the following broad instructions.</p>
		<p>I would allot each village space from government lands in accordance with its population. It was the responsibility of the villagers to erect shelters for visitors according to instructions to be provided by my office. They should regard these as temporary villages. It would be the responsibility of the officials of each village to administer these temporary villages as their own. This mainly meant providing water and sanitation facilities to the residents of these temporary villages. In other words, from the viewpoint of administration, each temporary village was to be treated as part of the existing village. The leaders expressed satisfaction with my scheme.</p>
		<p>Following this, we went to visit the five temples in the order in which pilgrims visit them. It was clear that a great deal work lay ahead of us. The pushkarini, to be used by the pilgrims, was unfit for bathing. It was filled with algae, and had to be thoroughly cleaned. The Vaidyeshwara Temple was buried in sand right up to its tower, with only a narrow opening leading to its main door. The other two temples of Talkad – Pataleshwara and Maruleshwara – were completely buried in the sand with only the tops of the towers showing. God only knew how long it had been since any kind of worship or service had taken place at these temples.</p>
		<p>Legend has it that the loss of these temples to sand was the result of Queen Rangamma’s (or Alamelamma’s) curse. As she was being pursued by the Raja Wodeyar of Mysore, before throwing herself into the river (c. 1600), she cursed that the place be buried in the sand and also that the rulers of Mysore be without progeny. Talkad and its temples had remained under the spell of her curse, though the Maharajas of Mysore, through their righteous conduct have managed to escape her curse. <sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-028-05">5 </a></sup></p>
		<p>The sorry state of the temples made us all unhappy. I gave voice to what everyone was thinking when I said, “These temples have brought us much fame. Their blessings have brought peace and comfort to us and to our elders. We should ensure the same blessings for our children and grandchildren. We are fortunate to be participating in the panchalinga festival after many years. Devotees will be coming here from many lands and far-off places. If they are disappointed like us today – by being unable to see the Lord – the disgrace will fall on us. We can earn the gratitude of the devotees for generations to come by restoring these temples from the grip of sand. Just as our rulers escaped the effect of Alamelamma’s curse with their righteous rule and conduct, Talkad also can escape the curse by serving the Lord by restoring his temples. What do you have to say?”</p>
		<p>This met with wholehearted agreement from the assembly. It was now a question of channeling their enthusiasm to achieve our objective</p>
		<p>– the restoration of our ancient temples. <sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-028-06">6 </a></sup></p>
		<p>We agreed on the following arrangements – able-bodied men in each village should contribute one week’s labor to the task of removing the sand. When they come for work, they should make arrangements for their food and other provisions also. Those unused to manual labor should either furnish a substitute or contribute enough provisions for three workers. In every village, the arrangement for men and supplies was the responsibility of the Patel organized through the caste and community leaders. The contribution that each village would make should be submitted to the Amildar within a certain date. Upon receiving the list of contributions from each village, the Amildar would organize the work, allotting the men and supplies to each temple to be excavated, and also providing the necessary work detail including supervisors in charge.</p>
		<p>All told, I received a list of eight thousand volunteers for the work and the necessary supplies. Many of them came willing to work not just for a week as originally stipulated but ten days. I prepared a time and work schedule to excavate the temples in a month.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-028-07">7 </a></sup>To supervise the work, I set up camp in Talkad itself, going to my taluk office only as necessary. I set up a temporary office under a tree on a sand dune, and even held court hearings in the open! As work progressed, and the temples slowly emerged from the mountain of sand, the enthusiasm of the workers knew no bounds. As the news of our work spread, volunteers and devotees began to arrive even from places outside the taluk like Kollegal and Malavalli. Many people brought provisions and other supplies, which they contributed free of cost. Some others set up temporary eateries to feed the workers, also free of charge.</p>
		<p>Upon observing the devotion and loyalty of thousands of men working voluntarily under my direction, a senior friend and official from Mysore jokingly remarked, “Had you been living in earlier times, you could have ruled over them as their chief.”</p>
		<p>“I collect their devotion and loyalty,” I replied, “only to be delivered to the Maharaja, just like the taxes they pay.” <sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-028-08">8 </a></sup></p>
		<p>When the work was in full swing, I invited the DC Kantha Raje Urs to visit Talkad. He was absolutely delighted to see our work. He promised to bring the Maharaja and other members of the royal family for the pancha-linga service. A minor episode during his visit brings to light Kantha Raje Urs’s large-heartedness. It came about as follows.</p>
		<p>On his trip to Talkad, Sirdar Kantha Raje Urs had brought his car. Cars then were quite unlike what we use today. They were mostly smoke and noise with very little power. On his way back, his car got stuck in the sand that had fallen on the road. (The roads also were not made for automobile traffic.) Much as he tried, he could not get his car out of the sand. Cars being rare those days, some of the men standing by were watching the proceedings as a form of entertainment. When we asked for help, a whole lot of them – many more than necessary – decided to join the fun and push the car out of the sand. They managed to get it out, but in their enthusiasm they also slightly dented its ‘mudguard’, or what we now call the fender. This was too much for the Sirdar.</p>
		<p>“You ruffians,” he shouted at them. “What do you think this is? A cart for hauling manure? Look at what you have done.”</p>
		<p>The poor fellows retreated, feeling somewhat ashamed. He took me with him in his car and dropped me off at Mudukutore. He was quite depressed by the whole thing.</p>
		<p>“Did you see my petty behavior Mr. Rama Rao?” he said as he left me. “Are you not disgusted with me? These poor fellows only came to help me. What right did I have to call them such names? Was I born with a car? Am I such a big man to call them fit only for hauling manure? Will God approve of such conduct?”</p>
		<p>“Oh, that is nothing sir,” I replied, trying to comfort him. “You should see and hear me when I lose my temper.”</p>
		<p>Even after this he was full of remorse for having hurt their feelings.</p>
		<p>Another episode that took place around the same time shows the differences in human nature. I received some hints suggesting that people in the Public Works Department were unhappy with the work we were doing, mostly clearing sand. They probably saw it as encroaching on their turf. One sub-overseer (junior construction supervisor) in their department had the habit of dropping by our work site and ridiculing the volunteer workers.</p>
		<p>“Why are you fellows slogging here for free?” he would say. “Don’t you have anything to do in your village?”</p>
		<p>I warned him not to meddle with our work or workers. One morning, I happened to be by the river, awaiting the arrival of volunteers from Moogur and surrounding villages. As the river was too deep for fording, I had arranged for a few harigolus (rafts) to ferry them across. I soon saw the vessel leave the opposite bank with some twenty or twenty-five men including a couple of jangamas. These men used to entertain the workers by singing popular songs accompanied by a stringed instrument. The sub-overseer was also in the raft. As it approached a point not more than fifty yards from the Talkad bank, there was a scuffle and the sub-overseer slapped a jangama. There was a sudden commotion and the raft began to sway dangerously as other people on board also joined in the scuffle. I asked my trumpeter to give a few blasts on the trumpet, making signs to calm down. When the commotion died down, I shouted at them to stay calm, telling them that I would hold an inquiry.</p>
		<p>As they came off the boat, the men seemed furious at the sub-overseer. He was already unpopular with my men. I don’t know what would have happened to him if I had not intervened. I calmed the people down and asked the sub-overseer to report to me especially his reason for slapping the jangama. He was very angry, and only said that he was not my subordinate and didn’t have to answer me. I got the details from others who were with him on the boat. They told me that the jangama lost his balance and fell on the sub-overseer who was standing next to him.</p>
		<p>“Have you no sense, you bastard!” the sub-overseer shouted.</p>
		<p>“It is your father who is a bastard,” retorted the jangama.</p>
		<p>One word let to another and the sub-overseer slapped the mendicant. That was when I intervened and stopped it from going any further. I asked the sub-overseer if this was true. He again repeated that he was not my subordinate and he had no need to answer me. I asked my orderly to hold the sub-overseer firmly in his arms, and told the jangama to give him a couple of slaps.</p>
		<p>“Never, my lord!” he protested even as he gave the sub-overseer a couple of juicy slaps.</p>
		<p>This pleased the crowd, which dispersed greatly amused by the rough and ready justice. But the sub-overseer was understandably furious.</p>
		<p>“People who gave you authority must have no sense,” he said. “Is there no law or justice here? Do you think you are a dictator? I am also a government employee like you. I’ll report the whole matter to the executive engineer. Or the deputy commissioner,” and so on and so forth.</p>
		<p>“Listen to me, sir,” I told him patiently. “If I had not intervened when I did, they would have beaten you to a pulp. Or they might have thrown you into the river – who knows? Officially you may not be my subordinate, but you are still subject to the authority of my court. I am the law enforcement authority here. If they had filed a charge against you, I would have to try you in my court for creating disturbance and sentence you. This might have cost you your job. These people regard jangamas as holy men. You should have behaved more responsibly. Actually I have done you a favor by settling the whole thing out of court. A court record can only hurt your career. Take some time and think it over calmly.”</p>
		<p>He must have thought over it. I heard no more about the episode.</p>
		<p>We pretty much cleared all the sand accumulated over the temples. On two of the temples the sand was so deep that we had to drive crowbars and search simply to locate their roofs. The new bloated Gazetteer says thus about these temples: <sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-028-09">9 </a></sup></p>
		<p>“Pataleshwara, Maraleshwara, Anandeshwara, and also Gaurishankara – these temples seem to have been only recently excavated from buried sand.”</p>
		<p>The same Gazetteer also intones:</p>
		<p>“These people seem to have done nothing believing it to be the result of a curse. They do nothing unless ordered by the Government.”</p>
		<p>This is amazing! The Gazetteer acquired its present bulk though a generous infusion of funds from the Government. Does its compiler think that these temples came out of the sand on their own, in response to a government order? Such are the ways of armchair historians!</p>
		<p>In any event, the pancha-linga festival was a great success. A large number of villagers came to Talkad and took care of the arrangements in the temporary villages in the places allotted to them. A lakh or one lakhand-a-half devotees visited Talkad for the event. A whole temporary town had been set up for their convenience. It included a line of shops, police stations, facility for helping lost and found children, lifeguards at the lake used for bathing as well as the usual arrangements for food, water, and sanitation. No one from the royal family attended except Kantha Raje Urs, accompanied by the Dalwai (army chief), many Arasu chiefs, and the Maharaja’s father-in-law, the Rana Saheb.<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-028-10">10 </a></sup>Kantha Raje Urs delighted in the devotional milieu of the occasion and promised that he would ask his sister, the Maharaja’s mother, to visit Talkad or Mudukutore. This did happen. I’ll reserve the story for a later occasion.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
