<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>THE VANISHED RAJ</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-031">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">GLOSSARY </h1>
		<p>-Only first occurrences of designations such as Diwan, Amildar etc have been italicized in the text.</p>
		<p>-Amildar – Local revenue and law enforcement official. Chief of the taluk. Known also as Subedar.</p>
		<p>-Anna – At sixteen annas to a rupee an anna was worth about six naye paisa, but its purchasing value was very much greater in those days</p>
		<p>-Bharata Natyam – Indian classical dance</p>
		<p>-Choultry – Accommodation for visitors maintained by the government, usually attached to a temple.</p>
		<p>-Dafedar – Police sergeant</p>
		<p>-Dharma – Duty, just conduct</p>
		<p>-Diwan – Prime minister</p>
		<p>-Durbar – Royal court</p>
		<p>-Fauzdar (old name) – Deputy Commissioner; known as Collector in British administered areas.</p>
		<p>-Ghat – Elevated land or plateau. Also steps leading to a bathing tank of a temple.</p>
		<p>-Ghee – Clarified butter.</p>
		<p>-Guru – Teacher.</p>
		<p>-Huzoor jamabandi – royal settlement</p>
		<p>-Jagir – Ancestral estate</p>
		<p>-Jagirdar – Jagir holder</p>
		<p>-Jamabandi – Annual revenue account settlement</p>
		<p>-Jangama – A penniless mendicant of the Veerashaiva community.</p>
		<p>-Jatra – A religious assembly and carnival -Jamedar – Junior police officer, just above a dafedar. -Jowar – A dry crop dependant on rains. -Lathi – Police club -Lingayats – A Hindu sect known also as Veerashaiva. -Mahabharata – One of the two great epics of India. The other being the Ramayana.</p>
		<p>-Patel – Hereditary village chief/ headman.</p>
		<p>-Pooja – A religious offering.</p>
		<p>-Ramayana – One of the two great epics, Mahabharata being the</p>
		<p>other.</p>
		<p>-Rasam – A soup-like dish.</p>
		<p>-Sahib – A generic form of addressing a senior official.</p>
		<p>-Sambar – A vegetable curry.</p>
		<p>-Santhe – Village fair</p>
		<p>-Sari</p>
		<p>-Seer – One seer is about 1 kg of grain</p>
		<p>-Shaivayats – Same as Lingayat, Veershaiva.</p>
		<p>-Shanbog – village accountant/ revenue clerk</p>
		<p>-Shekdar – Supply officer</p>
		<p>-Shirastedar – Amildar’s deputy</p>
		<p>-Sirdar – A close relative of the royal family.</p>
		<p>-Subedar – Old name for the Amildar, still in use. Now called Tahsildar.</p>
		<p>-Taluk – An administrative unit like a county.</p>
		<p>-Tola – A tola is about 11 grams of gold.</p>
		<p>-Vaishyas – The merchant caste.</p>
		<p>-Veerashaivas – Same as Lingayat.</p>
		<p>-Upanishads – Philosophic works based on the Vedas.</p>
		<p>-Ursus – Members belonging to the same caste as the rulers.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
