<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>THE VANISHED RAJ</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-032">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">CAST OF CHARACTERS</h1>
		<p>Some important persons and the chapter in which they first appear. An asterisk (*) indicates reference only rather than personal appearance.</p>
		<table>
			<tr>
				<td>Navaratna Rama Rao (1877 – 1960). The narrator. </td>
				<td>Chapter 1 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Navaratna Balakrishna Rao (1840 – 1925). </td>
				<td>Chapter 1 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Rama Rao’s father, a retired state official. </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Kashija Bai of Kallambilla. </td>
				<td>Chapter 1 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Rama Rao’s wife (c. 1880 – 1910). </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Brahmani Bai and Venku Bai: </td>
				<td>Chapter 1 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Rama Rao’s daughters. </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Krishna Raja Wodeyar IV, Maharaja of Mysore </td>
				<td>Chapter 3 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>(1884 – 1940, ruled 1894 – 1940). </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Maharani Kempananjammanni, known also as </td>
				<td>Chapter 30 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Vani Vilas (1866 – 1932). </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Maharaja’s mother and Regent during the </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Maharaja’s minority (1894 – 1902). </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Sirdar Kantha Raje Urs, Rama Rao’s friend and </td>
				<td>Chapter 2 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>superior officer, later Diwan (1918 – 22). </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>The younger brother of Vani Vilas and her </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>secretary during the Regency. </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Maharaja Krishna Raja Wodeyar III*, </td>
				<td>Chapter 23 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>ruled 1799 – 1831; deposed 1831, died 1868. </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Maharaja Chama Raja Wodeyar X*. </td>
				<td>None </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>(1863 – 1894, ruled 1881 – 1894). </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Sir K. Seshadri Iyer*, Diwan (1883 – 1900). </td>
				<td>Chapter 1 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Sir P.N. Krishna Murthy, Diwan of Mysore </td>
				<td>Chapter 1 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>(1901 – 06) and Rama Rao’s family friend. </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>V.P. Madhava Rao, Diwan (1906 – 09), </td>
				<td>Chapter 2 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Rama Rao’s and Diwan Krishna Murthy’s adversary. </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Navaratna Rama Rao (1877 – 1960). The narrator.</td>
				<td>Chapter 1 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Navaratna Balakrishna Rao (1840 – 1925). </td>
				<td>Chapter 1 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Rama Rao’s father, a retired state official.<br /> Kashija Bai of Kallambilla.</td>
				<td>Chapter 1 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Rama Rao’s wife (c. 1880 – 1910).</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Brahmani Bai and Venku Bai:<br /> Rama Rao’s daughters.</td>
				<td>Chapter 1 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Krishna Raja Wodeyar IV, Maharaja of Mysore<br /> (1884 – 1940, ruled 1894 – 1940).</td>
				<td>Chapter 3 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Maharani Kempananjammanni, known also as <br />Vani Vilas (1866 – 1932).<br /> Maharaja’s mother and Regent during the<br /> Maharaja’s minority (1894 – 1902).</td>
				<td>Chapter 30</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Sirdar Kantha Raje Urs, Rama Rao’s friend and<br /> superior officer, later Diwan (1918 – 22).<br />The younger brother of Vani Vilas and her<br /> secretary during the Regency.</td>
			<td>Chapter 2</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Maharaja Krishna Raja Wodeyar III*,<br /> ruled 1799 – 1831; deposed 1831, died 1868. </td>
			<td>Chapter 23</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Maharaja Chama Raja Wodeyar X*.<br />(1863 – 1894, ruled 1881 – 1894). </td>
				<td>None</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Sir K. Seshadri Iyer*, Diwan (1883 – 1900).</td>
				<td>Chapter 1</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Sir P.N. Krishna Murthy, Diwan of Mysore<br /> (1901 – 06) and Rama Rao’s family friend.</td>
				<td>Chapter 1</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>V.P. Madhava Rao, Diwan (1906 – 09),<br /> Rama Rao’s and Diwan Krishna Murthy’s adversary.</td>
				<td>Chapter 2 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td> Sir T. Ananda Rao, Diwan (1909 – 12)</td>
				<td>Chapter 17</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Sir M. Vishweshwariah, Diwan (1912 – 18)<br /> and visionary statesman.*</td>
				<td>Chapter 24</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Sir Mirza M. Ismail, Diwan (1926 – 41)<br /> and Rama Rao’s friend.* </td>
				<td>Chapter 1</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Chakravarti Rajagopalachari, known as ‘Rajaji’,<br /> (1878 – 1972), Rama Rao’s classmate,<br /> lifelong friend, co-author (of Ramayanana and Mahabharata) <br /> and the last Governor General of India.</td>
				<td>Chapter 1</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>John G. Tait (1861 – 1945). Rama Rao’s teacher </td>
				<td>Chapter 1 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>and mentor. Professor and later principal of the </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Bangalore Central College. Son of the famous </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Scottish mathematician Peter Guthrie Tait. </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Dasappa of Hadya (died 1904). </td>
				<td>Chapter 1 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Rama Rao’s close friend who tragically drowned </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>in the Kabini River in Nanjangud. </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Dasappa of Belavadi. </td>
				<td>Chapter 3 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>An eccentric schoolteacher of genius. </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>D.A. Ramanna. A cantankerous lawyer. </td>
				<td>Chapter 2 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>C.K. Venkatavarada Iyengar (V.V. Iyengar). </td>
				<td>Chapter 2 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Deputy Commissioner of Mysore and Rama Rao’s </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>superior officer at the beginning of his career. </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>‘Failed M.A.’ Srinivasa Murthy. </td>
				<td>Chapter 2 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>A district office clerk and trouble maker. </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Basava Rajappa. </td>
				<td>Chapter 3 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>A trouble maker silenced by Rama Rao. </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Amildar of Gundalpet. An official with real or </td>
				<td>Chapter 3 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>pretended connections to the Mysore durbar. </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Panduranga Shetty. A presumptuous petty </td>
				<td>Chapter 3 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>politician, sentenced to prison by Rama Rao. </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Inspector of Gundalpet. </td>
				<td>Chapter 3 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>A Muslim aristocrat who claims to be </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>related to the defunct Arcot royal family. </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Colonel Stevens. Commander of the </td>
				<td>Chapter 3 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>British regiment hosted by Rama Rao </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>during their stop at Bandipur. </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>‘Rajarshi.’ A noble Amildar who confesses to </td>
				<td>Chapter 4 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>his youthful indiscretions. </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Shekdar Panduranga Rao. </td>
				<td>Chapter 4 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>A supply officer with a taste for gourmet food. </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Masti Venkatesha Iyengar (1891 – 1986).* A junior </td>
				<td>Chapter 5 </td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>colleague and friend of Rama Rao. A leading figure </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>in modern Kannada literature and the author of a </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>biography of Rama Rao in Kannada. </td>
				<td/>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Betta and Yalakki. Amildar’s trumpeters. </td>
				<td>Chapter 5 </td>
			</tr>
		</table>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
