<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>THE VANISHED RAJ</title>
	<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<div class="footnote">
		<aside epub:type="footnote">
			<p class="footnote-head">Footnotes</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-000g-01">
			<p>1. It was not an easy thing to copy, built as it was on a system of trust and decentralized authority that had evolved over five centuries of history and tradition. The other princely states ended up copying some of its superficial features.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-000h-01">
			<p>2. The two main branches Navaratna clan are the Savanur branch and the Devanahalli branch. Before Rama Rao attained distinction, the Savanur branch was regarded the more distinguished. One of its members, Satyadharma Tirtha, a contemporary of Diwan Purniya, became a greatly revered head of the Madhva Uttaradhi Mutt. His samadhi at Kudali (near Shimoga) is a place of pilgrimage.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-000h-02">
			<p>3. His graduation certificate was with his eldest son Srinivasa Rao and is now with his grandson Rajaram.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-000h-03">
			<p>4. It should be recorded that Rama Rao was not one of Vishveshwaraya’s staunch admirers. They had basic differences over economic and industrial policy.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-000h-04">
			<p>5. He turned down the Government’s offer of extension of service.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-000h-05">
			<p>6. The Chairman (ex-officio) was Dr. Shyam Prasad Mukherjee, Minister for Industries.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-000i-01">
			<p>7. Both Masti and D.V. Gundappa consulted him during their well-known Kannada translations of Shakespeare. Rama Rao wrote the Foreword to Masti’s Hamlet.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-01">
			<p>1. One of them figures in the famous Kannada short story Takseeru written by Rama Rao himself.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-02">
			<p>2. This refers probably to those who had begun service under the rule of Krishna Raja III, before he was deposed by the British in 1831.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-03">
			<p>3. Kirtirsrivak ca narinam, smritirmedha dhriti kshama says Krishna in the Bhagavadgita. It means: ‘among feminine qualities — fame, wealth, speech, memory, wisdom, fortitude and forgiveness’.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-005-01">
			<p>Later he wrote also a short biography of Rama Rao in Kannada. Rajaram knew Masti well and had the opportunity to discuss some of the stories with him.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-009-01">
			<p>1. A Brahmin sect of Mysore.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-009-02">
			<p>2. Rama Rao’s yearly salary as amildar was a little over 2000 rupees, regarded at the time as a very good salary.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-009-03">
			<p>3. A public guest house maintained by the Government, usually attached to a temple.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-010-01">
			<p>1. Saabi in Kannada is a slightly derogatory term for a Muslim (which Sheik Mohaddin was), implying dull and lacking initiative.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-010-02">
			<p>2. Haruva’ is a derogatory Kannada word for Brahmins, implying pious hypocrisy.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-010-03">
			<p>3. The assistant commissioner that presided over the hearing was one Devraj Urs who had a personal grudge against Rama Rao and probably didn’t want him to get all the credit.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-010-04">
			<p>4. Inspector General of Police, the highest police officer in the state.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-011-01">
			<p>1. The land there being extremely fertile and irrigated, two crops are harvested per year – autumn and spring.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-011-02">
			<p>2. Was his correct name Sheikh Mohaddin, the resourceful young policeman who appears in the Tandrey Linga episode?</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-011-03">
			<p>3. There was much more regional variation in spoken Kannada in those days than is the case today.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-011-04">
			<p>4. Both repeaters and double rifles were common in India in those days. Rama Rao at the time owned a Winchester repeater (.30/.30) and later a .450/.400 double rifle by Westley Richards.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-011-05">
			<p>5. C. Rajagopalachari, Rama Rao’s closest friend and later the last Governor General of India</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-012-01">
			<p>1. The official royal flag of Mysore carried the two-headed eagle known as ‘Ganda-bherunda’.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-013-01">
			<p>1. The Kannada original uses the proverb; ‘like a eunuch in the company of Rambha.’ Rambha, according to Hindu mythology was an apsara or divine nymph renowned for her beauty.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-013-02">
			<p>2. Diwan Seshadri Iyer.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-013-03">
			<p>3. Srinivasa Iyengar, who was one of the Councilors when P.N. Krishna Murthy was Diwan.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-013-04">
			<p>4. An inam in the Maharaja’s Government was land whose tax went directly to a designated member of the royal family. The inamdar or the land owner had all the rights of a land owner but paid the tax to this royal individual rather than the government. The government collected the tax but passed it on to the royal member in question.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-013-05">
			<p>5. Shahaji, the father of the famous warrior Shivaji, had settled large tracts of land on Rama Rao’s ancestors. Most of it was lost when the British deposed Maharaja Krishna Raja III in 1831 and thoroughly reorganized the system. It was following this that family members including Rama Rao’s father Balakrishna Rao took up outside employment.</p>
			<p>This 'family friend' was Shivaji Rao, a wealthy landowner of Yedatore, and the father of Rama Rao’s close friend Devoji Rao. The story of how Shivaji Rao’s ancestors gained their land through the generosity of the Englishman Montgomery was related earlier. This was not the only instance. When Rama Rao became Secretary to the Government in 1926, the then Diwan suggested that he buy up some property in Bangalore, in an area that was earmarked for major urban development. This was legal but Rama Rao refused to take advantage of it, feeling that it was unethical to profit from inside knowledge.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-014-01">
			<p>1. Literally, 'Victorious Tenth Day' which closes the ten-day Dussera festival, a practice going back to the Vijayanagar Empire of which Mysore used to be a part.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-014-02">
			<p>2. Mysore Vasudev Acharya (1865-1960) was a renowned musician widely regarded as the greatest composer of the twentieth century. He was greatly admired by connoisseurs, but not so well known to the public especially at a backwater place Chunchana Katte. In any event, he was better known as a composer than singer.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-014-03">
			<p>3. It is unclear whether they were really visitors from Iran or if Rama Rao meant Parsis from Mumbai whose ancestors had come originally from Iran.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-014-04">
			<p>4. In Mysore, it was common to refer to all non-native Muslims as ‘Turka’ — or Turk. Iranians are of course not Turks.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-014-05">
			<p>5. Dalwai in Kannada means military chief. This refers to the office held by his ancestors more than a century earlier.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-014-06">
			<p>6. It was probably part of an effort to discredit Rama Rao, that he was biased in her favor because of her looks.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-014-07">
			<p>7. Rama Rao reproduced it in the original, making it one of the funniest passages in the book. But a translator is helpless before such virtuosity.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-015-01">
			<p>1. In reality, like most dynastic founders, Yadu Raya, the founder of the Mysore kingdom was of humble birth. He was probably of shepherd stock. Some historians claim potter.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-015-02">
			<p>2. Vasudevachar says that even boys from good families were discouraged from making music a profession. When he took up music, his elders were displeased and told him: “Get out of it. These performing artists have neither character nor decent reputation. Go find a respectable profession.”</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-015-03">
			<p>3. It is doubtful if they could be called a caste since they often came from different backgrounds. This kind of liason between a wealthy patron and a performing artist was common in Europe, but the missionaries who were influential in British India denounced these women as peddlers of sin and tried to abolish the practice and even stop performances.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-015-04">
			<p>4. This story was related to Rajaram, and is not found in the Kannada original. Subbu Laxmi (1916 – 2004) did not intend any sarcasm. Her personality was quite artless and incapable of sarcasm; to her it was a simple statement of fact.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-016-01">
			<p>1. To imagine that Rama Rao was still short of thirty when he made this decision!</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-017-01">
			<p>1. This story appeared for the first time in Rama Rao’s Memoir. It was not known until that time that Seshadri Iyer himself had recommended against Madhava Rao. It rests on the highest authority since Krishna Murthy himself told Rama Rao. The account given here is slightly more detailed than the one given in Kannada, with details provided by Rama Rao to Rajaram. In addition, Rama Rao felt inhibited by the fact that numerous relatives of V.P. Madhava Rao – many of them his own friends – were living at the time this story appeared in 1952.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-017-02">
			<p>2. It is said of Field Marshal Paul von Hindenburg that he owed his eminence in the Prussian army largely to his impressive bearing. Madhava Rao’s appearance and bearing played at least a part in his own rise.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-017-03">
			<p>3. In addition, it was in the Government’s interests to have revenue producing estates efficiently managed. This does not however take anything away from Madhava Rao’s generous spirit.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-017-04">
			<p>4. He had indeed. A year later Rama Rao practically created the Department of Sericulture, which led to the growth of silk industry in Mysore. It was the largest private employer in the State. Even today, Karnataka produces in excess of 80 percent of the silk produced in India.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-018-01">
			<p>1. T. Param Shivaiah was the father of the famous Kannada playwright T.P. Kailasam. He was also a remarkably original Vedic scholar who anticipated some discoveries that came to light much later.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-019-01">
			<p>1. He had lost his close friend Dasappa of Hadya in a drowning accident, but it was nothing when compared to the loss of his beloved wife Kashija Bai in 1910.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-019-02">
			<p>2. Normally, it would be improper and impious for an older man like Devarsay Gowda to be seeking Rama Rao’s blessings, but the latter belonged to a family of Uttaradhi Math seers or Guru Vamsha – meaning ‘Sacred Teacher’s Family’.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-020-01">
			<p>1. Rama Rao’s ancestors used to be heads of a religious cum educational foundation near Devanahalli, north of Bangalore. Krishna Murthy ‘s family, which was very wealthy, had made several donations to it.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-021-01">
			<p>1. ‘Ashrama’ is a hermitage in a secluded area. Rishi is a sage and apsara a nymph.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-021-02">
			<p>2. Known also as Shivacharas. They are followers of the sect founded by the 12th century religious and social reformer Basava. They started out as a reaction against the Brahminical practices and the caste system of the day, but later became a caste themselves. They have traditionally been hostile to Brahmins. Rama Rao was to later marry a Lingayat woman himself – a radical step in those days for a Brahmin.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-021-03">
			<p>3. It should be noted that the highest government official at the village level, the patel, was invariably a Vokkaliga.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-021-04">
			<p>4. This was in addition to agriculture, which was the mainstay of the taluk. The Narsipur taluk, watered by two rivers, is extremely fertile.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-021-05">
			<p>5. Veerashaiva sect is followed by some Vokkaligas also, especially in places where it is strong. As a result, patels, though belonging to the Vokkaliga community could be followers of the Veershaiva faith. But typically they tended to be nonsectarian.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-021-06">
			<p>6. Unfortunately, many modern sociologists take Du Bois’s account as an accurate description of society at that time. This simple debunking by Rama Rao, based on first hand observation, should serve as a corrective. What Du Bois has given is a caricature of people he saw as ‘heathens’, colored by the prejudices of a Christian missionary.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-021-07">
			<p>7. These are famous as the pancha linga – five Shiva temples – sacred to the Veerashaivas.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-021-08">
			<p>8. This ‘senior friend’ was Councilor Srinivasa Iyengar.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-021-09">
			<p>9. Rama Rao was a Madhva Brahmin, and therefore a Vaishnava, traditionally opposed by the Shaivas of which the Veerashaivas may be seen as the most extreme representatives.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-021-10">
			<p>10. By this Rama Rao means Karnatak or Classical South Indian music. He had little interest in Hindustani (North Indian) music.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-021-11">
			<p>11. This could also be explained by the fact that Rajaji was totally ignorant of music.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-021-12">
			<p>12. A famous and erudite composition by the eighteenth century composer Pacchimeeriyam Adiyappa.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-021-13">
			<p>13. Rama Rao took delight in denigrating his playing, but he was a fairly good violinist. The great South Indian violin maestro T. Chowdaiah, who came from T. Narsipur and was a friend of the family, once told Rajaram: “Your grandfather was a good violinist, as long as he stuck to pieces he could easily handle.” This can be taken to mean that he was a good amateur violinist whose technique was not up to professional standards. The same can be said of most amateur musicians in the world.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-022-01">
			<p>1. Ever since this story appeared in 1952, there has been much speculation over the name of this amildar. Since the episode took place a few years before Rama Rao took charge in Narsipur (1907), it is not especially difficult to determine his identity. Rajaram did find out, but decided that nothing is gained by revealing the name. It would mean nothing to present day readers anyway.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-022-02">
			<p>2. Also Malavalli is not in the Narsipur taluk where the narrated episode took place.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-022-03">
			<p>3. That is, from about 1890 to 1950, the true Golden Age of Karnatak music. The only great musician of the era that he probably had not heard was Maha Vaidyanatha Iyer (1844-93). As an accomplished violinist himself, Rama Rao knew whereof he spoke.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-022-04">
			<p>4. Mysore Vasudevachar (1865-1961) was probably the greatest composer of Karnatak music of the twentieth century.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-022-05">
			<p>5. Veena Subbanna (1855-1938), known also as Bakshi Subbanna was a celebrated Veena player and a wealthy patron of musicians. Considered by many to be the peer of the more famous Veena Seshanna, he seldom performed in public. He also took on promising students whom he taught without charging a fee, and even supported a few needy students.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-023-01">
			<p>1. The reference is of course to Keats’s famous poem beginning “Oft have I traveled through the realms of gold …”</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-023-02">
			<p>2. This is translation from Rama Rao’s Kannada version. The English original, written in the 1880’s is no longer traceable.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-023-03">
			<p>3. Now known as Pandavapura. At one time it was known also as French Rocks.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-023-04">
			<p>4. Devanahalli was the place where Tippu's father Hyder came to the attention of Nanjaraj Urs, the regent of the Mysore Mahararaja, by winning a shooting contest. Impressed by Hyder’s marksmanship, Nanjaraj appointed him a cavalry officer. That was the start of his meteoric career. Hyder, though he became effectively the ruler of Mysore, always claimed to be acting as the servant of the Maharaja. Tippu dispensed with this formality and styled himself Sultan.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-023-05">
			<p>5. There are only two rivers, but a third, a supposedly invisible river is believed to add sanctity to the place by completing the trinity.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-023-06">
			<p>6. These ferry boats, known as 'harigolu', are almost circular in shape. They are large shallow baskets made waterproof by covering them completely with buffalo hide.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-023-07">
			<p>7. Rama Rao’s mother was Ananda Tirtha Rao’s elder sister Brahmani Bai. Rama Rao later married Ananda Tirtha Rao’s daughter Kashija Bai.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-023-08">
			<p>8. As a Madhva, Rama Rao was a Vaishnava, or a worshipper of Vishnu. Apparently he worshipped at a Shiva temple which Vaishnavas rarely do. Various other descriptions are sectarian markings.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-023-09">
			<p>9. Ganga is the Holy Ganges, the Mother Goddess of people who live by the river — especially boatmen and fishermen. It is often applied to all rivers as an expression of reverence.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-023-10">
			<p>10. The ‘Great Maharaja’ was probably Krishna Raja Wodeyar III who died in 1868. The episode described above took place in 1908.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-023-11">
			<p>11. It should be noted that Tirumakudlu was then a temple town with just a few families living there. It had no facilities for feeding and lodging a large number of visitors.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-023-12">
			<p>12. This is now called ‘white water rafting’, but the sport was not common in those days. Also, people those days did not use life jackets.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-023-13">
			<p>13. These village priests, being uneducated had difficulty pronouncing the royal blessing, which was in flowery Sanskrit. It also shows that the amildar, as the representative of the Maharaja, was entitled to the royal blessing in temples.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-024-01">
			<p>1. It is clear that Rama Rao saw himself as the ruler and protector of his taluk. This no doubt accounted for the love and devotion of the people that he was able to command.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-024-02">
			<p>2. There is an interesting story about his devotion to his wife. When Diwan Seshadri Iyer built a luxurious house in Bangalore – now known as the Seshadri House – his wife refused to move into it because it had no place where she could perform her daily worship and honour Brahmins. In deference to her wishes, the Diwan built a small temple on the premises. It still exists.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-024-03">
			<p>3. ‘Parabrahman’ = Lord of the other world or God.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-024-04">
			<p>4. Rama Rao told Rajaram that Diwan Krishna Murthy confirmed the story for him. This was noted in an earlier chapter, describing Rama Rao’s last meeting with Krishna Murthy.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-024-05">
			<p>5. The Srivaishnava sect, also professing non-dualism, was founded by Ramanuja in the 12th century. They are commonly known as Iyengars. The Madhava sect was founded by Madvacharya in the 13th century.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-024-06">
			<p>6. This would be 1902, the year Rama Rao passed his law exam.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-024-07">
			<p>7. Vyasacharya’s teacher was his father (Rama Rao’s grandfather) Ramacharya. They were Madhvas, or followers of Madhvacharya who lived 1238 -1317. Madhvas are known also as Vaishnavas. Vaishnava simply means devotee of Vishnu and includes many more sects.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-024-08">
			<p>8. Sir MV as he was commonly known is regarded as a visionary, but Rama Rao did not hold him in especially high regard. He lived to be over a hundred, which, Rama Rao joked, was his major achievement. His words to Rajaram, describing Vishweshwaraya: “He is a ripe old man.” In the 1930s he and Rama Rao came into conflict over his extravagant spending when Visweshwaraya had been brought in as consultant. The photo above shows Vishweshwaraya as a young man.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-024-09">
			<p>9. Rama Rao continued in service even after reaching the mandatory retirement age in 1932, at the Government’s request. There was of course no way of knowing it when these predictions were made, sometime around 1920. He declined a second extension even though the Government offered to promote him. Later he received the title Rajasevapraskta from the Maharaja.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-025-01">
			<p>1. It is not clear if it was same Mada who took the lead in building the rafts for the marooned women and children during a flash flood described in an earlier chapter.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-025-02">
			<p>2. The actual Kannada word is ‘buddhi’ or ‘buddhiyore’, which has no English equivalent. The nearest is ‘wise master’, which we feel is too awkward. ‘My lord’ conveys the same idea of respect combined with intimacy. Swami was also a common form which means lord.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-025-03">
			<p>3. This was not due to arrogance alone. Muslim women in those days were kept in seclusion – a practice known as purdah. It still prevails in many Muslim communities in India and elsewhere. This created problems if they had to live in a camp with other communities.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-026-01">
			<p>1. A puzzling statement; there is no earlier mention of this famous temple by name. It could be the temple connected with the misadventure of the Amildar described in the chapter 'A Comedy of Design'.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-026-02">
			<p>2. A brilliant insight! The conduct described by Du Bois is totally incompatible with the belief of the devotees as a fierce goddess.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-026-03">
			<p>3. We have met the lawyer Ramanna before in Chapter 2. He was the one who insisted that Kantha Raje Urs should record what the witness did not know, and also argued with another judge about Mahommed of Ghazni.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-026-04">
			<p>4. We have met the lawyer Ramanna before in Chapter 2. He was the one who insisted that Kantha Raje Urs should record what the witness did not know, and also argued with another judge about Mahommed of Ghazni</p> 
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-027-01">
			<p>1. The Kannada phrase used is ‘Maharshi of the Kali Age’.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-027-02">
			<p>2. Melkote, not far from Mysore, is an important centre for the Srivaishnava sect of Brahmins. Its founder Ramanujacharya spent his last years at the place.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-028-01">
			<p>1. It is based on the famous Sanskrit prayer: sarve jana sukhino bhavantu – let all people be happy. It may be stated that Rama Rao was a devout but not orthodox Hindu. He was a Maratha Brahmin, often called Deshastha. He came from an illustrious family that included saints and scholars that are still honored centuries later. The most famous of these was Navaratna Purushottamacharya (1743 – 1830) better known as Satya Dharma Tirtha, Pontiff of the Uttaradhi Mutt 1794 – 1830.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-028-02">
			<p>2. It is interesting that the longest legal dispute on record, lasting nearly 800 years, was over a similar controversy, relating to the right of passage of a temple procession in Poona, in Western India. (This is according to the Guiness Book of Records.) Several empires rose and fell in that time. So the temples must have retained their claims through the ensuing centuries.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-028-03">
			<p>3. In Sanskrit — yati sarvatra pujyate.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-028-04">
			<p>4. C. Hayavadana Rao.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-028-05">
			<p>5. Not entirely. Only those rulers who were adopted as heirs have had heirs born to them, not those who were born to ruling kings. For example, Krishna Raja III (died 1868) adopted Chama Raja who became Maharaja upon attaining majority in 1881. His son Krishna Raja IV (ruled 1894-1940) had no children and adopted Jayachama Raja as his heir. Jayachama Raja (ruled 1940-48) had several children including a son Shrikanta Datta. True to the pattern, Shrikanta Datta has no children though he is no longer the ruler. So Rani Rangamma’s curse has held for every prince born to a ruling Maharaja while it has spared adopted heirs. Medical scientists suggest this was due to some generatic disorder, the result of marriages between close relatives for several generations.</p>
			<p>Rangamma (or Alamelamma) was the wife of the chief of Talkad whom Raja Wodeyar (ruled 1578-1617) defeated and killed c. 1600. He then tried to capture Alamelamma with her jewels who cursed him and the land he conquered before committing suicide by jumping into the deep Malangi trench in the Kaveri. Raja Wodeyar tried to make amends by building a temple in her honour and regularly offering prayer. This story was well known to his readers when Rama Rao wrote this passage (1952). This suggests that the accumulation of sand and the disappearance of the temples into the sand dunes began about that time, c. 1600. </p>	
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-028-06">
			<p>6. It is remarkable that unlike a modern archaeologist, Rama Rao and his associates approached their work not as antiquarians but as a continuation of their living tradition. There is a lesson here for Indian archaeologists: their work is part of a living tradition and not a resurrection of lost civilizations like Egypt or Mesopatamia. In the face of this it is absurd to claim that Indians have no sense of history.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-028-07">
			<p>7. This would now be called PERT chart, except that it was not in use at the time.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-028-08">
			<p>8. This ‘senior friend and official from Mysore was Councilor Srinivasa Iyengar as previously noted.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-028-09">
			<p>9. This refers to the Mysore Gazetteer compiled by C. Hayavadana Rao. The excerpts given here are not directly from the Gazetteer but English translations of Kannada translations given by Rama Rao. We feel they are not important enough to try and locate the hard to obtain Gazetteer by Hayavadana Rao. It is clear that Rama Rao did not think much of him. He was justifiably annoyed that the compiler of the Gazatteer had not bothered to find out who was responsible for the excavation. Anyone in Talkad would have told him.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-028-10">
			<p>10. The Maharaja had married a Rajput princess.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-029-01">
			<p>1. Masti Venkatesha Iyengar, Rama Rao’s close friend and biographer, was one of the leading figures in modern Kannada literature. His long story or novelette Subbanna is probably the greatest work of its kind in Kannada. Masti owed the subject of the story to Rama Rao, which he acknowledges in the preface.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-029-02">
			<p>2. Actually Venkatasubbaiah was fairly well off and a recluse. The Maharaja offered to make him a court musician but he declined. There is even a short biography of Venkatasubbaiah. So he was not altogether an unknown. Rajaram heard him a couple of times in 1960, but by then he was in decline and tired easily. The golden tone was still there even if only for brief periods.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-029-03">
			<p>3. A celebrated violinist (1893-1964) of the first half of the century, known especially for his beauty of tone, admired among others by Yehudi Menuhin.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-029-04">
			<p>4. The words in the original are raga-dvesha translated here as ‘attachment and hatred’ – not altogether satisfactory.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-029-05">
			<p>5. Fifty years or thereabouts. Shamanna was a young musician when Krishna Raja III was the titular king of Mysore, having been deposed by the British in 1831. He still held court and supported artists.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-029-06">
			<p>6. This refers to Krishna driving Arjuna’s chariot on the battlefield in the Mahabharata War.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-029-07">
			<p>7. A reference to a famous story when the Yadava prince Lord Krishna visited his impoverished devotee Kuchela and accepted his hospitality.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-029-08">
			<p>8. Seventeenth century Kannada epic by Lakshmisha, a classic of Kannada literature. Apparently it was more popular than the older Kumaravyasa Bharata which today is regarded the greatest Kannada work.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-029-09">
			<p>9. Rama Rao was an accomplished linguist who knew Kannada, Marathi, English, Hindi-Urdu, Tamil, Sanskrit and French.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-030-01">
			<p>1. Maharani Kempa Nanjammanni, better known as Vani Vilas, was the wife of Maharaja Chama Raja Wodeyar and the mother of Krishna Raja IV. She had ruled as regent during Krishna Raja’s minority, from 1894 to 1902. She was an important figure in the building of modern Mysore, who supported progressive causes like women’s education. She endowed the women’s hospital in Bangalore that is still known as the Vani Vilas Hospital. Kantha Raje Urs was her younger brother and also married to his daughter. Marriages among close relatives was common in those days, especially with the aristocracy. He had served as her secretary during her regency.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-030-02">
			<p>2. This has been Rajaram’s experience also on a few occasions when he had the ‘opportunity’ to entertain so-called royalty and aristocracy in India and Europe. A friend with a good deal more experience with Indian royalty described them to Rajaram as ‘pucca kanjush’– utter misers.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-030-03">
			<p>3. Happily Rudrapatna – a seat of great Veena players – has kept the tradition to this day. R.K. Suryanaryana and his elder brother Srinivasa Murthy (both recently deceased) are justly celebrated as great artists.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-030-04">
			<p>4. This daughter was Princess Lilavati.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-030-05">
			<p>5. This was so with the common people and hard working government officials like Rama Rao. As the episode with the Durbar Baxi shows, with her own staff she could be both demanding and sarcastic.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-030-06">
			<p>6. More likely, it was because Rama Rao, as a Madhwa Brahmin, had a Madhwa cook from Udupi as his personal cook. Udupi cooks are known as the best in South India and almost monopolize the restaurant business even in places like Mumbai.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-030-07">
			<p>7. This partition was only for the sake of privacy of the royal quarters, not to be confused with the ghosha or the seclusion of women practiced by Muslims. Being Hindus, the Maharani and the princesses appeared in public and mixed with people. The rest of the account makes this clear. (They also went to the same schools as their subjects.)</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-030-08">
			<p>8. In the Mahabharata the grandfather Bhishma tells Yudhisthira who had just assumed kingship: “Dear son! Remember that the powerless should never be hurt. Let not the tears of the weak burn you and your family!” This was the guiding principle of enlightened ruling families like those of Mysore.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-030-09">
			<p>9. A terrible mispronunciation of the last three words of the prayer – the only ones that he could recall.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-030-10">
			<p>10. A folk drama staged outdoors.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-030-11">
			<p>11. Yakshagana is an elaborate form of dramatic art combining music and dance. Their subject is invariably drawn from Indian mythology and epics like the Ramayana and the Mahabharata. Of late they use contemporary social themes also but these have yet to produce a genius like Kalidasa. Traditional plays continue to be preferred.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-030-12">
			<p>12. It should be noted that though the Queen Mother was his older sister, there was a certain formal distance between the two because of her high position and the fact that she had been ruling as Regent only seven years earlier (1894-1902). Kantha Raje Urs had served as her secretary during the regency.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-030-13">
			<p>13. Of course it was correct. This ‘high official’, needless to say was Diwan V.P. Madhava Rao. The Diwan did not help himself with this extraordinarily petty act. Unhappiness was brewing in royal circles, and Madhava Rao was made to resign a few months later on a minor pretext. Rama Rao was soon promoted.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-030-14">
			<p>14. This ‘days of chaos’ refers to the period of near anarchy resulting from the arbitrary rule of Hyder and Tippu — especially the latter — when the long standing administrative system was uprooted by meaningless reforms like introducing Persian as the official language. This was followed by the thirty year rule of the young and inexperienced Krishna Raja III, who lacked the resources and the support (including British support) to restore order. The British Commission administered the state from 1831 81. There is evidence to suggest that British agents undermined the Maharaja’s efforts to restore order after nearly forty years of chaos. So the ‘misrule’ which led to the removal of Maharaja Krishna Raja III had sources outside his control.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-030-15">
			<p>15. Sort of security and intelligence personnel not in police uniform.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-030-16">
			<p>16. Everyone though knew who the Maharaja was.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-030-17">
			<p>17. It was a system that had evolved over several centuries of history and tradition, and not something that could be copied overnight as some other princely states tried to do. The period of direct British rule (1831- 81) left the authority and influence of the Amildar undisturbed, and may have even increased it due to the increased remoteness of British officials from the people.</p> 
		</aside>
	</div>
</body>
</html>
