<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Friend’s Quest</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d.1">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Preface</h1>
<p>The idea for this book lies solely in my imagination. I had a way with words since a young age. Thanks to my overly imaginative mind, when I was trying to invent a new game to play by myself one day. I got an idea which I decided to develop into this story. While writing this story, my brain thought up new ideas. I couldn’t fit them all in this story, so I thought of making this book as a trilogy - a series of three books. Be sure to read my next books !</p>
<p>Firstly, I would sincerely like to thank the Prism Books Pvt Ltd., for publishing my first book and the editor Mrs. Anupama for providing me with suggestions and better ways to frame my story.</p>
<p>I would like to express my gratitude towards Mrs Vasundhara Srinivasan for encouraging me.</p>
<p>I want to thank my drawing teacher Mr Suresh from Kenfortes Art Class for supporting me.</p>
<p>The last but most important thanks goes to my family for all the support they lent to me.</p>
<p>I thank you, the readers too, for reading my book. I hope you will enjoy it!</p>
<p class="text-right"><strong>Harshitha Hebbar</strong></p>
</section>
<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d.2">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Dedicated</h1>
		<p><strong>Dedicated to my family and to all those who would love to become Ronens!</strong></p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
