<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Friend’s Quest</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Acknowledgements</h1>
		<p>My sincere thanks are due to</p>
		<p>Michael D. Hirschhorn for having provided an introduction to Ramanujan’s mathematics which is far above the reach of a common man. I greatly appreciate his friendly gesture.</p>
		<p>I sincerely thank Prof. Bruce Berndt, Department of Mathematics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA, for pointing out certain mistakes and errors in the manuscript. I am indebted to him for making the manuscript more “accurate”. </p>
		<p>Sri. Viswanathan (grandson of Narayana Iyer) who has encouraged me by providing important and interesting material about Ramanujan. He has been kind enough to forward me any newspaper article he comes across, anything he learns from Prof. Bruce Berndt or Prof. Robert Kanigel. He has given me many details of the relationship between Ramanujan and Narayana Iyer.</p>
		<p>Prof. S W Armfield (University of Sydney), who kindled my interest in Ramanujan,</p>
		<p>The late Dr. Shankar Sangameswar who gifted my son with a copy of Robert Kanigel’s masterpiece <em>“The Man who knew Infinity” </em> which has become a source for all the later books on Ramanujan,</p>
		<p>Sri. Narayanan (adopted son of Janaki Ammal) and his family, Smt. Meena Suresh (Director, Ramanujan Museum, Chennai) for giving me much valuable information.</p>
		<p>Dr. C. V. Madhusudana and Dr. Saro Srinivasan for reviewing the manuscript.</p>
		<p>Sri. S. Pranesh Siravara of Prism Books Pvt. Ltd. for encouraging me to write the book and taking care of its production and publishing.</p>
		<p class="quote-author">Sydney Srinivas</p>	
	</section>
</body>
</html>
