<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Opening to Trust<br />Emerging paths in Rehabilitation of the Mentally ill</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000f">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Introduction</h1>
		<p>One of my first experiences with serious mental illness, was when a young man with schizophrenia approached me while I was working as a counselor in a Jesuit center in Bangalore. He had been living on the streets, so I allowed him to stay in a small hut that we had. I was determined to help him and I believe that because I regularly spent time with him, he is still with me today, living his life successfully.</p>
		<p>Helping him meant learning much more about schizophrenia and rehabilitation. And this work I am still doing today after 35 years, and will be continuing to do.</p>
		<p>As I go on doing this work I know deep down within myself, there is that phrase that I learnt when very young – “go with it”. And I guess that is the story of my life – “go with it”, when there is an opportunity, to help somebody less fortunate, I go with it.</p>
		<p>So, now I am in the position where I need to tell people what I have studied and learnt concerning mental illness and the difficulties of young people suffering from it. I have been with enough young people, learning to overcome the difficulties they have and I am now committed that families and general public realize that it is possible to live and over come mental illness. And I can refer to two or three hundred young people who have been able to make the necessary changes in their lives.</p>
		<p>I have been asked many times by people to write my story. I have various reasons for writing. I guess the main reason for my writing is to let people know that it is possible to make changes in their personality so that they can function and can have a meaningful and happy life. And I today appreciate all the feedback and gratitude that people have given me.</p>
		<p>So, I have put together a collection of my writings for over 35 years, in the hope that those people who are struck with mental illness may realize that there is a way of establishing themselves in a healthy and positive way. I want to share what many young people, who had serious problems, have taught me, concerning the ability to function with clarity of mind and with enjoyment.</p>
		<p>I also hope that this will interest all those who are working with the mentally ill and that the book may provide guidance and hope that there is a way through.</p>
		<p>A note on the structure of the book.</p>
		<p><strong>Part I,</strong> Story of Athma Shakti was recently written by me, for the purpose of this book, the rest of the articles are those written at various times in the past 35 years. So most of this book is a collection of those articles compiled not necessarily in a chronological order. Except for “Story of Athma Shakti”, the rest of the articles can be independently considered.</p>
		<p>The articles are meant to help somebody mulling over their past and providing insights on how to express them at present.</p>
		<p>All the names of all kids (except Maria who is no more) have</p>
		<p>been changed to protect their privacy.</p>
		<p>I have organized my writing under these headings</p>
		<p><strong>Part I – The story of ASV </strong>is about the beginnings of ASV and my motivations for working with the mentally ill.</p>
		<p><strong>Part-II – Mental Illness an Understanding </strong>.Here I have complied various articles written to educate people on the nature of schizophrenia and serious mental illnesses.</p>
		<p><strong>Part III –</strong> In this process, many of my writings also come from my extensive readings of Eric Berne, Bowlbyetc. I am indebted to these authors whom I have quoted extensively in my workshops. Process has articles on the methodology used at ASV. These also contain my notes under Reflections. I hope these reflections provide the raw material for others to begin reflecting on their own life and the helping process, since reflection is a very integral part of any helping process.</p>
		<p><strong>Part IV – Letters to parents – </strong>letters that I wrote to parents periodically, leading them into the process of their own mental growth, and my efforts at furthering their understanding of mental illness. These letters have learning and teaching value.</p>
		<p><strong>Part V – Kids</strong>- is a record of my day to day interaction with seriously disturbed patients and can provide an intimate understanding of the process by which individuals begin to recognize their ability to change and move towards mental health.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
