<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Opening to Trust Emerging paths in Rehabilitation of the Mentally ill</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<p><strong>Part - II</strong></p>	
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-002">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Mental Illness – an understanding </h1>
		<section class="level2 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-002.01">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">The Shadowy World of Mental Illness </h2>
			<p><span class="big-letter">I</span> live in Bangalore. The new Bangalore, the city that has become synonymous with the new growing economy, a place of employment, a city bursting at the seams, a city full of many shopping malls, a symbol of bright glittering world of today. It exists for young people, for anyone willing to take their place in the developing India. Bangalore city is this crowded metropolis, a workshop for developing instant communication, energy, creativity, enjoyment. This world is a bright, clear world, but although almost everybody appreciates this brash newness, other people are less happy, for hidden within this world there is a shadow world. My creative interaction is within this other world hidden in this city. I have been involved for the last 30 years in a shadow world . I have seen the quiet garden city of Bangalore become the bright glittering world of information technology. But for me I have become more and more aware of the shadow world that is also present to a few of us in any city, as it is in any countryside, in any rural area. And this shadow world is that of mental illness.</p>
			<p>A world of uncertainty, a world of isolation, a world of negativity, such is the everyday world of the mentally ill. In this shadow world the hazy and often irrational communication of the mentally ill is far from the clear, bright, fast-developing creativity and galloping social growth that is resulting from the inventive digital means of communication. Yes, in this shadow world, the shadows or miscommunications, slow and block communications in families, communications with friends and associates. These hindrances to clear, understanding communication, block the moves of the young adult mentally ill men and women of today to be assimilated into the emerging new culture that pervades in many ways the city of Bangalore. Irrational, dark, threatening images often may arise from the shadows we all carry within us. It was the great Carl Jung, the psychologist, who referred to the unconscious realm of our personality as the shadow. We all carry within us that shadow. As we walk towards the sun along the street on a sunny day we don’t notice the lurking shadow we throw on the ground behind us. But it is there. As our shadow, our unconscious is ever with us, so unknown and unrecognized but very active in our thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Only when that shadow world begins to trip us up, causing some of us to have what we may experience as uncontrollable negative feelings, or thoughts and beliefs that may cause us to unduly hesitate or withdraw in anger and depression. When we begin to experience any unease or distress, any discomfort the reasons for which we may not be aware, then we are probably living and reacting from our unconscious shadow. As we reflect on the difficulties we may have in relating with other people or dissatisfied with ourselves and our behaviours we may recognize that we do have a shadow. All of us have a shadow, all of us in varying degrees. We need to admit that we are not fully conscious of the tendencies dictated by our shadow.</p>
			<p>I would like to reflect on this aspect of our personalities that is generally ignored by the society. The shadow world, which ordinary people may be reluctant to admit, would like to say is not there, we cannot deny. It is there and many young people suffer horribly in the shadow world. I am speaking of mental illness, something most of us seem ready to ignore and not acknowledge. Although this reality is something that we do not like to recognize, loath to give any attention to, does exist. It is something we cover with a stigma, black out of our interest, a reality not in my reality, not to be given attention. Any interest or concern for the mentally ill is for other people, not for me. Compare your reaction if a person came up to you and told you that he has a cancer, then another person immediately comes up to you muttering non-sense or loudly chanting to nobody but himself, to whom do you give attention ?</p>
			<p>When a person is drawn into that shadow world there is tragedy for themselves, their family and all society, for if you take one person out of the healthy, reasonable functioning human society there is loss. It is not a material loss, it is a spiritual loss for, that person can no longer share his or her love, cannot experience the true, meaningful, emotional experience of human life. Yes, with the internet, we contact so many in so many places for many silly reasons and say that world is becoming more one. But really are we becoming more one in depth when many are placed out of circulation by families, by society, by community? Today the WHO reiterates again and again that the healing of the mentally ill must be community based.</p>
			<p>Most of us wish to belong to the modern, fascinating new knowledge community, brought to us by TV and the other media. But some of us have no awareness of what is happening in the human community. I was asked to meet a young girl, a young girl not fitting into the community, as she had some psychological problems. I was told she was not coping in her life, and had problems with the stresses and strains of living with her family. She was fully in the shadow world. She had to withdraw, she had to meet the psychiatrist, take psychotropic medication because of her inability to handle her feelings and thus handle her thought process. She had to be evaluated by the psychologist and then, if there was one available, speak with a psychotherapist to attempt to discover the unconscious roots of her odd behaviors and unstable existence. She spent a year, then another, and another, three years in all struggling to find solid ground for her disturbed living practices and to understand her inconsistent thought processes. She went through the whole process of learning the ability to relate to other people quietly and with purpose. She did well for she is intelligent, and basically wants to reach out to others and have friends. She did better than most people with her problem and has been able to return to a normal, functional life.</p>
			<p>The next step was to step out of the shadow world into the bright, promising world of Bangalore. She applied for a job, for employment in the fast, exciting world of information technology. She went to a call centre that advertised a special program for engaging and hiring persons with any disability. She went through the interview. The interviewer experienced her as competent and told her that she had done very well, infact better than many others whom he had interviewed. He asked for her degrees. She had no college degrees. The interviewer then quietly but firmly explained to her that she could not be hired, for he said, they hired only degree holders. Remember the fast new internet world must maintain the speed of the future. She could not tell him that she had had to spend the usual college years in treatment for her psychological problems. She had not been able to spend the time that a normal person without the stigma of mental illness spent in education. She had spent that time in treatment. As a citizen of the shadow world, she was familiar with the taboo learned by experience not to talk of her shadowy past. When a person by means of medication and years of therapy is able to emerge out of the shadowy world of mental illness, they do not have a piece of paper to prove that they can be just as competent as the next person. How was she to dissipate the unspoken questioning and the hesitations in the mind of the interviewer and prove to him that her present clear thinking and awareness of feelings and ease in handling those feelings may be more mentally healthy and reality based than his. Remember that mentally ill persons who have come through their ordeal must always examine perseveringly their thoughts and feelings and be able to acknowledge and explain to themselves and if necessary to others, their internal reactions and feelings. And given some trust this young girl could probably have shown that her reactions were as reality based as that of a person who has not been forced to go through the long and painful sessions of therapy.</p>
			<p>People can emerge from mental illness and function as well as any ordinary person in front of a computer or become engaged in any other gainful employment. I could here relate the story of the Head of the Postgraduate Department of a large central government medical college, happily married and the mother of two growing girls. People classified with mental illness should never accept the condemnation so often made that they must accept that their destiny to live on the obscure, hidden sidelines of life. There is a route out from mental illness; it is possible to come out of the darkness into the light, out of the disordered, unreal beliefs into the solid, certainty of clear thought.</p>
			<p>Consider what happens when a person becomes mentally ill. Mental illness begins in young people in their early teens say 15 to 18. The beginnings are not obvious; they are often shadowy, and not clear. Let us take for example, a young man who’s been a fine member of the family through his life, although may be a little shy and sensitive in his early years. He may have been a younger member who did not match up to the ambitions of his father or matched the activities of his older brothers and sisters. He may have done well in school, although he may have had some difficulty making friends. He may have been successful and done well until Class Ten but, in that year began to be more withdrawn, began having trouble with his studies, along with a tendency to withdraw into his room, not wanting to get up in the morning, not reacting to the parents who keep insisting for him to be active. He may have long unexplained periods in the bathroom. And sometimes he may be talking strangely and expressing odd imaginings. With all this going on, the parents will not fully understand what is happening with the young man. They may put it down to teenage problems, simple growing pains, teenage troubles; There must be an explanation somewhere. But in vain they seek for an explanation, and really it is near impossible to give a firm explanation for the symptoms of mental illness or the process of mental illness, although a psychiatrist may venture to give a name to his illness, prescribe medication accordingly.</p>
			<p>But, there may be some more meaningful explanation if we spent enough time going over the highs and lows of the person’s life, spending enough time questioning them about their many feelings and beliefs about themselves at different stages of life. The person could be asked to relate as much as possible the important feelings, thoughts and memories of his life. Out of these long and painstaking discussions will come to a fairly good idea of what could be the hidden unconscious causes of his negative behaving and inability to relate in any meaningful manner with other people, be they family or otherwise. The search is to uncover the incidents in the distant past that have been quietly shunted into the shadow, into the unconscious, yet even now have the power to bring confusion into his present functioning. As this strange behavior begins in this family, may be one of the friends of the family or a relative will make the suggestion that perhaps there is something more serious happening and perhaps might be good if he were taken to a hospital or even to a psychiatrist. The psychiatrist will verify the seriousness of the plight of the young person. Meanwhile with the person who may now be called a patient, there may even be bursts of anger happening, some throwing of plates or other objects. The family becomes worried and although there is hesitancy they are beginning to realize that something must be done. They realize deep within that something very wrong is happening yet still loath to admit it, for as with the majority of the population knowledge of the intricacies of mental illness is almost nil. So the family’s world is expanding more quickly than they ever expected. Their learning is being forcibly enlarged, being opened to uncertainties, to behaviors never before experienced. There is much that is new, strange, peculiar. Often bizarre quirks develop within what was a quiet happy home atmosphere a year ago. Many aspects of the familiar, quiet times of the home world are becoming unfamiliar, estranged from the usual understandable family life. They now have concrete experience of a serious problem disrupting family life. This problem is centered in this one member with whom it is practically impossible to communicate. The situation is serious. And it is basically an unhappy and tense situation, one that has happened unexpectedly and without any seeming cause.</p>
			<p>The psychiatrist will spend time he has talking with the patient. The time will be limited because of the large number of people with serious psychological problems. He will prescribe some medication which will usually give some relief to the family. However, quite often parents will complain that very little is explained to them or to the patient. Often it is very difficult to give any full explanation of what is taking place within the patient. The parents want to know more, want something they can understand and gives them a clear control of the home situation. They have to accept whatever is told to them. They have to manage to convince the patient, this young man now afflicted with this unfortunate condition, their disturbed son, to accept this new medication prescribed by the psychiatrist. With the medication the young man may hopefully be more quiet, more withdrawn. Usually or very often he may want to refuse the medication. And this is one important characteristic of the mentally ill. It is quite impossible to come up with a valid reason why almost all the mentally ill want to refuse the medication or desire to be free of it as soon as possible. Often the effects of the medication are not explained, nor the reasons why this medication and not another.</p>
			<p>Often it seems some sort of secret must be kept, there is no naming, no diagnosis, nothing specific so that the family now can understand what is happening, what they can expect, what the future course of action will be, how the healing will come about.</p>
			<p>With the usual medical problem there will be a definite prognosis, some hope given, while any consultant for the mentally ill at this early stage is reluctant to make any promises for he or she is aware that no definite secure plan of recovery is readily possible. In the shadow world "of mental illness" nothing is clear and definite. The psychiatrist will do his best to match the medication to the problems which the young man is presenting.</p>
			<p>With the medication the young man may show more activity, may be able to return to some study, be more amenable in his behavior, but all family members will experience some odd mannerisms they see as quite disruptive in this life and distressing in the family life. The young man may withdraw from reality, be afraid to walk down the street. He may be lost, speaking of some weird ideas and hopes, often very angry, acting out, showing defiance, all of which gives worry to the family. They will be wondering what is going to happen, what will be the outcome of this continuing crisis. Paramount in this whole happening are the feelings that arise. Feelings are so very important in our lives. This young man cannot control his feelings, especially the level of his feelings, of feelings that he cannot understand, or ever experienced before. Uppermost in all of this will be his fears, his angers and his depressive sadness.</p>
			<p>The recognition of feelings is most important. I believe the road through mental illness is through the feeling the person is exhibiting. The negative and uncontrolled feelings are a sign that the basic sense of self is disturbed, a non-acceptance of the contents of life, so there is no quiet, calm, assured, ease, peace within the deep awareness of the self. In mental illness someone might say that the ego is dominant and has taken over the captaincy of the ship and it cannot be unseated from its dominant, demanding, unreasonable power. The medicating may quiet this dominating, ever changing unreasoning tyrant somewhat. But it is only when the individual is clearly aware of his feelings and their roots, and with insight controls his feelings and thoughts, memories and beliefs, there will be space and openness for feedback. The acceptance of the feedback is essential, for it facilitates his inner reasoning and will lead him to trust his own deeper self. Slowly peace and true beneficial control and happiness may be gradually experienced. Perhaps all his may sound quite simplistic, however, it is probably the best road leading out of mental illness. Schizophrenia is a regressive illness so questioning and reflection needs to be kept simple when you consider how mental illness can garble a regressed personality.</p>
			<p>The world of mental illness is a shadow world. My intention over the past 30 years has been to bring some simple light to the treatment of mental illness. I use the word simple but in treating the mentally ill we have to keep the interactions with the person quite simple, keep it clear, in understandable words and phrases. The therapist however, must be very perceptive and creative in his thinking, very much aware of his feelings and reactions, continuously questioning various options in his proceeding, aware of his choice, always trying to bridge any gap between himself and the ill person, attempting to establish better connection with his client, speaking to the whole person he is speaking with, inviting him or her to be open in tentatively discovering another person, a person who wishes to understand the pains and anxieties with which he feels afflicted. Finally he may perhaps begin to experience a small new idea that perhaps he may be able to trust this person who seems so interested in him. He may allow himself to remember that once upon a time he was familiar with an engaging, shared world of loved family members and friends.</p>
		</section>
		<section class="level2 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-002.02">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Misery Opens to Joy </h2>
			<p><span class="big-letter">T</span><em>hey wanted him to go to college<br /> after all he had<br /> done so well in school<br /> such good marks<br /> so well behaved<br /> so quiet and unobtrusive<br /> and now<br /> see him now<br /> not getting up in the morning<br /> not talking<br /> rather muttering to himself<br /> seeing what is not there<br /> afraid to go out<br /> not washing<br /> even not eating<br /> why why why?<br /> What happened <br />what went wrong ?<br /> he had everything he could have wanted<br /> or so it seemed<br /> the parents were loving<br /> in their way<br /> at least that is what they believe<br /> and yet<br /> perhaps<br /> it could have been different<br /> How to find out <br />for he will not talk about<br /> what it was like<br /> way back when he was so small<br /> and vulnerable<br /> when his thoughts about himself<br /> were being formed<br /> way back then he was making choices<br /> choices he was not even aware of<br /> but choices which somehow or other<br /> relate to the now<br /> and now withdrawal<br /> the now tendency to anger and violence<br /> the now inability to meet and talk with others<br /> How to break through<br /> how to get him to trust<br /> for what is trust ?<br /> or is it trust that he needs<br /> who needs to trust<br /> those who trust that he can come out<br /> those who trust that he needs to be shaken up<br /> and told to behave<br /> those who trust that just being with him will work<br /> yes he needs to trust<br /> that frightened little boy needs to find<br /> someone who accepts<br /> who trusts trusts<br /> that he is needing<br /> tries to help find what he is needing<br /> opens to that special needing<br /> waits, suggests, pauses, listens<br /> wonders, guesses, states, talks clarifies<br /> all the while trusting that the presence will work<br /> realizing that it takes time, time, time<br /> days and days and days <br />weeks and weeks and weeks knowing that there are no miracles<br /> no easy solutions<br /> no simple explanations<br /> knowing there are fall backs<br /> hesitations<br /> doubts<br /> fears<br /> runaways into the inner realm<br /> yet stays with him<br /> accepts to be there now and always<br /> accepts to be demanding warmly<br /> accepts to be consoling firmly<br /> and hopefully there is a change<br /> a sense of openness to communication<br /> and then real communication coming back<br /> a recognition of caring<br /> a realization that acceptance is there<br /> and acceptance of acceptance <br />happens happens with a slow deep awareness of need<br /> and a change of attitude<br /> yes there is goodness in the universe<br /> and he admits he can share in that goodness<br /> so to start thinking for self<br /> being responsible for self<br /> responsible to another<br /> to others<br /> and the truly graceful belief that life<br /> can be lived with a taste of joy. </em></p>
		</section>
		<section class="level2 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-002.03">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Schizophrenia – a Social Illness in which we all share </h2>
			<p><span class="big-letter">7</span>AM. The alarm clocks wakes Joe. It continues to ring, louder and louder and seems to never stop. Joe gets up. The ringing is now almost deafening. He covers his ears, but he still hears it. He does not know what to make of this. He opens the window, and the loud noise of the alarm clock spreads through the air, presumably heard by everybody. At first it sounds like the siren of a police car, then of a fire engine; finally it seems so powerful as to transmit a warning signal to the whole city. The streets, too, are unusual this morning. The buildings have assumed funny shapes. Everything is brightly hued, like Technicolor. In the 24 years of his young life Joe has never experienced a similar sense of foreboding and ominous mystery.</p>
			<p>It is dusk , and Pari is walking home. But the dusk is darker than at other evenings, and the road lights seem dimmer than usual. The noises of the city are different, continuous, with an incessant sound of dismay, sometimes fading away and then coming back, like waves. There is a whispering in the air, diffused, unintelligible. Gradually, words become distinguishable. They are about her. She looks backward. There they are, peculiar men with grotesque faces who follow her. What do they want from a poor, innocent, 22 year old girl? They are spying on her. They may want to catch her and kidnap her. She runs home in panic. Her trembling hands try to find the keyhole; she opens door, bursts into tears, and screams, Mother, Mother, they are following me, they are after me.</p>
			<p>Joe and Pari are having acute attacks of schizophrenia.</p>
			<p>If Joe or Pari is a member of your family, their pain becomes your suffering, your crucial problem. If you are fortunate never to have the disease touch your family, you may have a friend or a neighbour who has suffered from it. You may have met patients who have been discharged and are now in the community. You may be motivated to help because of your concern for those fellow human beings who are afflicted. You may have heard something about schizophrenia and gathered information to conclude that to know about schizophrenia means to know a great deal about the human condition and predicament.</p>
			<p>Schizophrenia cannot be ignored. In recent years, however much more attention has been paid to other diseases. Coronary disease, cancer, diabetes have captured the public interest. Schizophrenia has not stimulated equal concern. Yet, no other condition creates such heavy economic burdens for the state or the family. If we assess the gravity of an illness solely by the number of people who are affected by it, then alcoholism deserves the greatest attention. But if we evaluate importance in terms of the severity of mental disturbance, or of the degree of interference with the functions of the mental health, then no other problem is of greater magnitude than schizophrenia. When we consider the impact of schizophrenia on the present generation (there are about 40 million schizophrenics in the world), we conclude that no war in history has produced so many victims, wounded so many people. No earthquake has exacted so high a toll; no other condition that we know of has deprived so many young people of the promise of life.</p>
			<p>Why, then, has schizophrenia received relatively little attention in the press and other media directed at the general public? There is no single answer. Many people, discouraged by the numerous problems that schizophrenia presents, assume an attitude of denial; they act as if schizophrenia does not exist, or as if they feel the best way to deal with it is to ignore it. We recognize that this denial is founded on a common and ancient prejudice toward mental illnesses – so called madness, craziness or insanity – of which schizophrenia is the most typical representative. The fear of mental illness, or the concept of mental illness as something to be ashamed of or horrified by, leads to its denial. They believe that we too, if we are eccentric or if we assume an extremist, controversial, or unpopular position, may be wrongly labeled as schizophrenics, leads to its denial. The apprehension that we may be secretly suffering from this disorder leads to its denial. The fear that we may be the direct and only cause of schizophrenia in others, especially our children, and that we may have to face the resultant guilt, leads to its denial. The absolutely unfounded belief that nothing can be done about it also leads to its denial. The truth is that approximately one of three patients recovers completely, and more than one-third improve sufficiently to live adequate lives.</p>
			<p>Schizophrenia is not something that we need to feel ashamed of or guilty about, just as we are not ashamed of or guilty for earthquakes that may occur where we live. And unlike earthquakes, schizophrenia is a phenomenon that we can do a great deal about. In the realization that schizophrenia is still with us we must find an additional incentive to improve the ways in which we organize our environment and our social institutions, live within our families and affect one another.</p>
			<p>It is important to have compassion for the mentally ill, to understand their suffering and to overcome prejudices towards them, but it is even more important for us to develop a sense of kinship for the patient, because it implies compassion and abolition of prejudice. If we do, the likelihood of our being able to help will also increase. In many we may even admire the patient.</p>
			<p>The schizophrenic is not the only fugitive from the reality. The creative person too feels a prisoner in the midst of things as they really are and wants to change them by adding something that will make the world more beautiful, more understandable or more controllable. Scientists, poets, artists, playwrights, and other creative people use some mental processes similar to those used by the schizophrenic – and by the normal person when he dreams. Creative people are able to fuse these strange mental processes with the usual logical mechanisms of the mind, and the result is creative work and creative products. The schizophrenic cannot make this laborious synthesis. He uses imaginative processes in destructive ways. Nevertheless, the study of these mechanisms clarifies to a considerable extent the complexity of a creative person. Schizophrenia thus does not remain just a medical and humane concern. It is true that our consideration, commitment, and involvement derive from our great concern for people who suffer from this condition. But in addition, the study of this disorder will give us the possibility of seeing from unusual perspectives the labyrinth of the human mind – that ever – unfolding and never – finished entity that has no equal for complexity in the world known to science. By studying schizophrenia we examine in a unique way the great enigma of the human being, his eternal wavering between truth and illusion; his constant uncertainty between love and hate his conflict between his desire to embrace his fellow men and his fear of them; and his circuitous journey between increasing suspiciousness and absolute faith, between his insatiable hunger for other people and his deep, interminable isolation and loneliness. These extremes encompass the vast panorama of human existence.</p>
		</section>
		<section class="level2 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-002.04">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">From a letter to a young lady wanting to understand schizophrenia </h2>
			<p><strong>Dear Rebecca, </strong></p>
			<p><span class="big-letter">T</span>hanks for your letter and the request to know more about schizophrenia. I appreciate your having this interest as there are very few people who would want to know more about this disturbing condition, a frightening condition for many people and families, and a very severe condemnation when a young teenager is told that he or she is a schizophrenic.</p>
			<p>For in the minds of many psychiatrists and doctors and in the minds of the general public, the illness cannot be fully explained, there is no known simple way of coming out of the condition, and for many there is just no way out – it is a condition that you will have all your life. It is the unknown that upsets people when referring to schizophrenia, as any unknown often disturbs people. But with schizophrenia, the unknowns are what is usually uppermost. It is often unpredictable how the individual diagnosed as schizophrenic is going to react, what strange and odd behavior they may show at any time, what uncontrollable feelings they will display, what spontaneous, unrelated reactions or speech they may show, what violence they may show, or what level of withdrawal he or she may show. A schizophrenic may not understand what you are trying to make him or her understand, may talk in seeming riddles that has no relationship to what is happening at present. The person seems to be in a world of their own.</p>
			<p>One way of looking at the seriously affected schizophrenic is to see or refer to the person as a very young child acting and relating as a 2 or 3 years old, but living in a 17 or 18 or 25 or 30 year old’s body, for schizophrenia is a regressive disease where the person regresses to an age where the problems coping with the world around him or her will go away. In many cases the person is very afraid, greatly afraid and cannot cope with demands of relating to others, cannot understand what they are afraid of and cannot resolve the fear so they withdraw or attempt to get along in whatever manner the deluded thinking leads them to act or say. And because of being afraid, they feel someone is causing them to be afraid and someone causes me to be afraid, I will become angry at the person. This can happen even if the person is not conscious that they are afraid. Many schizophrenics are not conscious of their fear, the deep fear they have and feel threatened at an existence level. At times those who work and meet and look after the schizophrenics have to be very careful for the very angry schizophrenic can become angry at what we may call the third degree level, that is, attack to cause grievous harm if not worse. And at the same time fear or anger at life which they cannot express or find a solution for, causes them to be suicidal.</p>
			<p>The illness does not relate to a person’s intelligence quotient, or IQ. Often, the schizophrenic is a very intelligent person and this itself may cause them to be more questioning of themselves and their present reality than the other person who can let the world go by them without taking the “whips and scorns of nature” too seriously. The schizophrenic is under pressure all the time even when he or she is withdrawn into their own mind. So basically I believe the first experience of the person is to make us aware of the person’s feelings and the level of those feelings, and how they are expressing those feelings. For, remember they may have no sufficient control of those feelings. It is not very often that they will be violent, yet the caretaker has to be wary and careful that there is no occasion or reason presented on which the ill person can act out. Whenever the caretaker is handling the person who is actively a schizophrenic, there is an important factor that must be taken into consideration, something that can have a tremendous effect on the life of the ill person. This is especially important when the ill person is tending to violence or to serious depression or withdrawal or seemingly lost and estranged. One of the foremost behaviors of the schizophrenic, especially when young, in the beginning stages, is the withdrawal and tendency to isolation. This tendency is often because of anger with parents. Many times when parents have brought a young schizophrenic to me and I ask them if he or she has been violent, the answer will usually be “oh, don’t worry, he has only been violent with us, his parents”. So there seems to be some break in relationship, a lack of appreciation for the parents he or she should feel close to. And this can be very depressing and hurtful for the parents, putting them in a seemingly hopeless position.</p>
			<p>So, when dealing with a withdrawn or quiet schizophrenic the essential thing is to, if possible, quietly break into the isolation. As I said before the ill person is like a child searching and not knowing what is wrong, what they want or what they are essentially missing. My belief is that the person is missing contact, they sense that they are all alone, lost with no base or solidity. We may experience feelings and realize that we have contact with ourselves, but we hesitate, consider and realize that we have contact only with our self, our base. We know what we are feeling and thinking, We are sure that it is I myself in my own awareness of consciousness so I need not be drastically afraid or protective or needlessly afraid. I still have my feet on the ground and can reach out for verification and support. I have others I can relate to, who will help me to understand my experience as I share with them. I am firm in my base.</p>
			<p>So, there is a process that I find most helpful in my endeavors to bring an upset ill person to settle and listen, to be present to be here and now. My intention will be to be quietly present, totally and deeply connected to the person. I say totally, I mean that within myself I am reading all the clues I can pick up from the upset person, so he will in some degree experience that he is safe, he is not alone, he is being listened to by someone who wishes to connect with him, to convince him that I am open to his being with me now for unconsciously there is a self in him that wants and needs to feel attached to someone and that someone now happens to be me interested wholeheartedly in him. But all this must delicately, slowly and gradually be brought forward. Through this process I have had persons who have been ill for a few years or were upset, who begin to realize that they have a “self” that is wanted and is accepted, that they can trust that self that may be a little bit allowing itself to function unconsciously with him, that self which will come to monitor the bizarre thinking and find appropriate level of feelings and hopefully give them the greatest experience we can all have – that is to accept the happy responsibility to our own self and to all those whom we live with and love.</p>
		</section>
		<section class="level2 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-002.05">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Questions Looking for Answers </h2>
			<p><span class="big-letter">I</span>f anyone becomes at all familiar with the various aspects of what we term as schizophrenia he or she will begin to realize what a labyrinth of opinions, theories, conditions, treatments, hopes, disappointments, angers, fears they have fallen into. Just as in the inner environment of the suffering patient, clarity for most of us does not exist. It is all a confused jumble, especially for the schizophrenic and his family. With about eight million schizophrenics in India, there are many stumbling around in this confused jumble, this confused environment. There are various leads which seem to show the way somewhat, some which lead to a certain success, others which end up as dead ends, or hold out hopes as illusory as the voices and sights that many of the schizophrenics make up.</p>
			<p>The subject of schizophrenia is full of questions looking for answers. And those answers are distressingly slow in coming. Each person who is schizophrenic is a living question – how did it all begin, why me, how is it I have these feelings, where do my hallucinations come from, why do I have such terrifying fears; of many small matters, where does my destructive anger come from, can I get any relief, do others feel as I do, how can I trust anyone, why am I cast off, alone, imprisoned, not understood, not accepted, not loved? So, many questions are there. I intend in this article to consider some of the questions looking for answers. They are questions not often asked but it might be useful to ask them and reflect to see what answer may be forthcoming.</p>
			<p>One of the first questions to be asked is why is it that it is so easily accepted that the schizophrenic will remain so throughout his or her life? Here you have a person trying to figure out what is happening within him, feeling impulses and pressures that he cannot explain and he is told that he will have to remain like that throughout his life. Perhaps he is promised some alleviation but is also told that he will never be considered fully responsible for himself or reliable as normal people are, nor will he be fully aware of how to control the various ups and downs he experiences within. That is quite a life sentence to be lowered on him. That is quite a life sentence to be lowered on anyone. People have come out of the schizophrenic condition – they have come to realize the causes of the feelings and impulses which seem to be driving them and have learned to control those feelings and impulses. They have learned that there are moves and changes they can make, moves in their belief system, and in their thinking, moves which will make some joy a reality for them. It is possible.</p>
			<p>So, how and why do we stop ourselves from emphasizing the schizophrenic’s ability to recover and get well, to establish true communication with significant others in a functional, meaningful life? There is always hope, but do we give substance to that hope? If we give trust to that hope then we will notice changes and perhaps be surprised by outstanding changes. I believe that we are in a positive and important area of human life here. We can refer to the beliefs around schizophrenics in history, how those who acted strangely were thought to possess special powers, to have some abnormal depth to their personalities which would be of help to those who were not so blessed. After all, what is this depth?</p>
			<p>We refer to it seemingly as the unconscious. And what is that? It seems to be an openness to what we cannot understand, what we can only believe is there. There seems to be some power there- a power of compassion, of love, of sharing, of being united and helping one another. Our belief in this power within us can enable another individual to be strengthened and to be willing to accept the experience of being the person he or she is.</p>
			<p>Why is it that we do not give credence to this power of our openness and belief to lead others out of the confusion that seems to exist in the unconscious. We can lead them out to clarity and love.</p>
			<p>I know that I am speaking of an area of the human personality that is not fully definite and clear. We have our experience of this area. And even if we do not want to admit its importance it plays an important role in our lives. Often we are afraid to admit that we are being influenced from this hidden area in our personality, for if we were to admit to it we would have to seriously see how we are being influenced – and would perhaps have to stop running, stop trying to escape. What is it we try to avoid but the need of change, change rooted down deep within and shown in our behavior with others. Are we open to consider our need of change in our attitudes, our beliefs, our thinking towards other persons, our closed thought patterns. Are we ready to give up memories, let go of hurts, allow ourselves to be compassionate and loving.</p>
			<p>We acknowledge that the world around us is changing each day – so many new ideas, so many new cultural patterns, so much new technology. We are part of the changing environment. But are we willing to work to change or are we shut down? We believe that schizophrenics must change to be happy. How much pressure are we willing to put on ourselves to change? We might be afraid that the schizophrenic now functioning normally will challenge us to change? How quickly we cross the street to avoid passing by the raving person on this side. I believe that the schizophrenic is always challenging us to change, asking us to realize that we all need to keep growing and searching for ways to bring more compassion and love into our world. Why do we not see that aspect of their life and conduct? In centuries past they have always been challenging the healthy individuals to see the new and special possibilities in our human growth together. It is the same today, so why do we keep seeing them as trouble-makers and failures? The schizophrenic has the same possibilities as we have. Our belief that he or she can and will use those possibilities will enable them to use the possibilities.</p>
			<p>Let us consider another question which comes up when we talk about schizophrenics. In our therapeutic community we talk often about “getting well”. Families come to seek admission for a disturbed member of the family in order for them to “get well”. How much some families really believe in the person’s ability to get well after all that they have been through can be questioned. Let us consider a bit what perhaps “getting well” means. It will definitely mean different things for different people. Most of us would say that a human person needs to be able to relate in a meaningful manner with other persons, especially one or two significant others whom he or she trusts and accepts care and affection from. Also in return the person will be expected to be able to return that care and affection and in fact does that.</p>
			<p>We find ourselves in this universe and experience the need to find understanding and support from others and find our happiness in giving that understanding and support to others. So, the schizophrenic needs, like all of us, to be able to form meaningful attachments to others, to a significant other. It is that attachment , that bonding that makes it possible for the schizophrenic to trust in himself and then open in trust to another. Why is it so hard for us to extend patience and love for the mentally ill, for the schizophrenic? It is true, they don’t seem to want our love, our care. They seem to push us away. And that is not true. On the surface it might seem so. But if we stop and stay open at a level deeper than the noise and agitation and withdrawal we may sense some activity at some level, may be at the deepest level where the schizophrenic is not fully aware of what is happening. It could be that bonding is taking place. Bonding may take place with anyone who is sincerely open and accepting. At the heart of the bonding is the affectional attraction of one individual for another individual. Often it cannot be explained in a practical manner because it is created on the inner, deep level of the personality.</p>
			<p>Whatever has happened in early life, usually the schizophrenic has difficulties in bonding, and may not have a satisfactory experience of bonding and has not been able to form meaningful attachments with others. Yet all persons need to have attachments. John Bowlby has studied and written extensively on the concept of bonding. The following quote is from his book, “The making and Breaking of affectional Bonds”.</p>
			<p>“Thus attachment behavior is conceived as a class of behavior distinct from feeding and sexual behavior and of at least an equal significance in human life. There is nothing intrinsically childish or pathological about it.</p>
			<p>It will be noted that the concept of attachment differs from that of dependence. For example, dependence is not specifically related to maintenance of proximity, it is not directed towards a specific individual, it does not imply an enduring bond, nor is it associated with strong feeling. No biological function is attributed to it. Furthermore, in the concept of dependence there are value implications the exact opposite of those that the concept of attachment conveys. Whereas to refer to a person as dependent tends to be disparaging, to describe him as attached to someone can well be an expression of approval. Conversely, for a person to be detached in his personal relations is usually regarded as less than admirable. The disparaging element in the concept of dependence, which reflects a failure to recognize the value that attachment behavior has for survival, is held to be a fatal weakness to its clinical use”.</p>
			<p>It seems to be quite clear that schizophrenics need some sort of attachment to someone whom they believe they can trust to take care of them. If this is true then why is it that society does not make a greater effort to set up situations or places in which schizophrenics can meet with people with whom they could form attachments. In some ways I believe that most people are afraid of the idea of dependency. They are reluctant to have someone depend on them, while some others are only too happy to have one dependent on them – they will use the dependency of others as a means to their own aggrandizement and satisfaction.</p>
			<p>The ability to form attachments and to be able to use them as a means of emotional fulfillment and health is a sign of what is referred to as the mature functioning of the human personality. I believe it is mark of “being well” or “getting well”. Dr. Dean Ornish in his book on reversing heart disease states that the most important factor in enabling persons to alleviate their physical heart problems is the ability to be able to open our hearts to others –to be able to communicate and recognize and appreciate attachments with significant others. He writes :</p>
			<p>“ I realized that if someone else can have that kind of compassion for my inner darkness, then maybe I can for myself too. I can begin opening the window allowing the light to shine in, and realize that it is not dark anymore.</p>
			<p>And to the degree I can do that, to the extent that I can have the same compassion for my own ignorance and my own darkness and my own demons, then I can begin to have that same compassion and love for other people whenever they display their darkness to me. When I can do that, it helps to free both of us…</p>
			<p>The ongoing process of learning compassion – for my own darkness and that of others – is what helps to free me from my sense of isolation. That is what frees us, that’s what heals us. And eventually it may even open our arteries as well as our hearts…</p>
			<p>The real issue for me is how we can feel more free and more joyful. How to open our hearts on psychological levels – to build intimacy – and spiritual levels – to develop compassion. More precisely we are free already; by remaining compassionate, we can stop binding ourselves and limiting our freedom. We may live longer because of this, but that’s not the primary goal. We can live better.”</p>
			<p>So, the endeavors which we make to bring schizophrenics to form attachments are really part of the most essential process that we all need to work through in order to make this universe a joyful place. The environment is the word bandied about very much today. And it must be given due importance – the word and the reality. But what is the value if we have a tremendously beautiful garden populated by a group of people sitting off by themselves not communicating and being unhappy and disgruntled. Why is it that we do not give the necessary importance to the inner environment, the environment of the heart? Perhaps it is not so important to find an answer to that question and perhaps we never will. But let us strive with all the effort available to improve the inner environment – especially the inner environment hidden behind the schizophrenic mask – the disturbed and confused environment of the person suffering from serious emotional problems.</p>
			<p>Our efforts begin with communication and end with communication, for in the communication we give and receive the care and love we exist for. And so we come to share a joy which silences all our questioning and gives us the answer which will always be satisfying.</p>
		</section>
		<section class="level2 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-002.06">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Mental Health - a concern </h2>
			<p>-creative transformation - the person has to be creative, do something they have never done before.</p>
			<p>-new insight – new decision or letting - go</p>
			<p>-coming through the fear</p>
			<p>-leaving the anger</p>
			<p>-willingness to accept the uncertainties of life</p>
			<p>-accepting my limitations</p>
			<p>-all persons created to love – to be together – acceptant of all</p>
			<p>-realizing my need of the other</p>
			<p>-trust – with the unknown that must be accepted – and respected</p>
			<p>-belief – our highest activity – our need to believe</p>
			<p>-the mystery of human life – to accept the mystery – we live a mystery</p>
			<p>-finding the joy and warmth of human life</p>
			<p>-the subjective and the objective</p>
			<p>- Rumi – This being human is a guest house<br /> Every morning a new arrival<br /> A joy, a depression, meanness<br /> Some momentary awareness comes<br /> As an unexpected visitor<br /> Welcome and entertain them all !<br /> Even if they are a crowd of sorrows<br /> Who violently sweep your house<br /> Empty of its furniture,<br />Still, treat each guest honorably<br /> He may be clearing you out<br />For some new delight<br />The dark thought, the shame, the malice<br />Meet them at the door laughing<br />And invite them in<br />Be grateful for whoever comes<br />Because each has been sent<br />As a guide from beyond</p>
			<p>-to accept that other persons have much the same experience as I am having</p>
			<p>-it is alright to have a problem or difficulty in trying to understand my inner experience at the present moment, and believing that I can do something within myself to be more comfortable being the person I am although I must admit at the same time that I, require the acceptance, support and assistance of some person who has a better understanding of myself than I have of myself.</p>
			<p>-I will admit that I can follow the advice of the other person and will remain open to this advice.</p>
			<p>If I give more value to my thinking then I can choose whatever I decide to do with my being. If I am unhappy enough then I do not have a right to be rid of my existence, something I have not given myself, so I cannot decide to simply throw it away. If you differ from me in your thinking it is not right for me to torture you into a submission to my way of thinking. My right to life and happiness is founded on my existence, my being, not on your thinking or idea of me. First I exist, then I think.</p>
			<p>My honesty is based on my deeper self. I need to be honest with you because of your existence as a person, not just on my attitude towards you. I become aware of my existence, my spiritual self, a consciousness of my deeper self, what some call my conscience. My right to life; to be treated well, to be respected with love and care, are based on this spiritual self that I am. People are often proud because they base themselves on their thinking, their attitudes, the appearance of their body. I can be humble because I am sure of my base, that is, my being, what I refer to as my deepest self. My humility is based on my deeper self, based on my quiet deep self, my existence, knowing that I am acceptable even though others have more abilities than I may have. So, the reality is that even though I cannot think correctly, cannot handle my feelings, am considered mentally unwell, I am always acceptable and of worth. My life still has an absolute meaning for myself and others, especially those who love me.</p>
			<p>I believe that the persons who are having mental problems have a great, an almost insurmountable difficulty in being conscious and aware of their deepest self, although they can be aware of the thoughts and feelings guiding them. Often in the same way they feel alone, finding it very difficult to relate at any deep level with other people because they do not appreciate their deeper self. So also they will not be open to accept serious feedback until they are open in some sort of relation with the person giving the feedback. At times they also have difficulty in accepting the other person needing to be respected and loved.</p>
			<p>I believe the basic aim of each of the persons in therapy must be to recognize the existence of others. I mean recognizing the deeper self of the other as an individual with whom he or she can honestly and humbly share the deeper self through talking about thoughts, attitudes and feelings. The main purpose in therapy should be to recognize and attach to another individual and to question self honestly about what is keeping them away from relating in a purposeful manner with another person.</p>
			<p>What I have written above is an attempt to express in a simple way my understanding of any therapeutic process. If you wish to question me you are most welcome. We need to dialogue on our process in order to build up a better understanding of what will be most helpful in improving the process of therapy.</p>
			<p>I thank you for sustaining your relationship with all of us here in this therapeutic community – of which I desire you to be an active member. May all of us enjoy the life that is ours and that we share with others.</p>
			<p class="text-right"><strong>April 20, 2005 </strong></p>
		</section>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
