<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Opening to Trust<br />Emerging paths in Rehabilitation of the Mentally ill</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-006">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Part - VI Hope for the Future</h1>
		<p><span class="big-letter">T</span>he problem begins when the parents discover that their child is mentally ill. At this point they need to believe that things can be worked out, even though it seems impossible in the beginning.</p>
		<p>It must be remembered that there is no easy solution to the problem even though they go through a lot of talk and medications.</p>
		<p>There can be a solution, but it is necessary that anybody who is involved should be open to possibilities and follow through.</p>
		<p>In my work, I have found some of these possibilities, and I have come away with a belief in each person who is having the problem, because you never know which one of them might be willing to be open.</p>
		<p>If you think you can do any work with them then be ready and open, freely and openly to form a relationship with them. Some of them may foster it, some of them may not. Even though the success with any person with mental illness, depends on various factors, every opportunity must be followed though. I believe that it is not correct to guess and say that there is no way that this will not work with this kid.</p>
		<p>We have to be ready to see that much more may be needed, because we will be meeting different people with different degrees of illness. Communities are necessary to provide this kind of varied support. So, much depends upon having communities functioning together and accepting the many different problems presented by the young people.</p>
		<p>And those who are ill need to believe that it’s worth while to follow and trust that there will be help available if everybody stays together and asks for help.</p>
		<p>It follows that what we need are not just committed individuals but committed communities looking after a number of people working together. I believe that every young person who has been struck with mental illness should have the opportunity to present himself in those communities and receive the support of staff, parents and other friends who may need similar help.</p>
		<p>These communities should be financed by the government. Years ago, I have treated young men and women from abroad, in communities here, their expenses for the treatment were supplied by foreign governments. But in India, parents have to fend for themselves, which makes it doubly difficult.</p>
		<p>At present, those communities which look after the mentally ill because they have serious mental problems need the support of government for taking care of the mentally ill, both in terms of money and legislation that understand the functioning of the community. Every seriously mentally ill person needs to receive government aid, for getting well. The future of those who can come out of their illness will need to be secured with a system that will provide them with job opportunities.</p>
		<p>With this encouragement received, there is hope in these communities for the mentally ill.</p>
		<section class="level2 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-006.01">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Summary</h2>
			<p><span class="big-letter">T</span>he Athma Shakti Vidyalaya is a school, a research institute, a therapeutic community, and yet something more for those to whom it has given hope where there was once despair. Perhaps this something more is best expressed in the following lines quoted by the kids themselves.</p>
		</section>
		<section class="level2 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-006.02">
			<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">We Came</h2>
			<p class="myquote"><span class="big-letter">W</span>e came to find ourselves,<br /> and discovered one another.<br /> We came to find love,<br /> and discovered loving<br /> We came to find a way,<br /> and discovered there are many<br /> We came to grow,<br /> and found we will always be growing</p>
			<p>It is the dream of Athma Shakti Vidyalaya that eventually, through training, research and education, hope will be within the reach of the victims of schizophrenia and their families throughout the world.</p>
		</section>
	</section>	
</body>
</html>
