<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>Prism Books</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body>
<HR>
<ul>
<li>
<A>Page 1
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 2
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 3
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 4
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 5
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 6
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 7
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 8
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 9
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 10
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 11
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 12
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 13
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 14
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 15
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 16
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 17
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 18
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 19
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 20
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 21
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 22
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 23
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 24
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Chapter-2.pdf
</A>
<ul>
<li>
<A>Page 1
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 2
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 3
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 4
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 5
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 6
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 7
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 8
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 9
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 10
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 11
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 12
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 13
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 14
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 15
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 16
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 17
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 18
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 19
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 20
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 21
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 22
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 23
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 24
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 25
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 26
</A>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>
<A>Chapter-3.pdf
</A>
<ul>
<li>
<A>Page 1
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 2
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 3
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 4
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 5
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 6
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 7
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 8
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 9
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 10
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 11
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 12
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 13
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 14
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 15
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 16
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 17
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 18
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 19
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 20
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 21
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 22
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 23
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 24
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 25
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 26
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 27
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 28
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 29
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 30
</A>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>
<A>Chapter-4.pdf
</A>
<ul>
<li>
<A>Page 1
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 2
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 3
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 4
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 5
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 6
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 7
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 8
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 9
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 10
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 11
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 12
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 13
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 14
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 15
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 16
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 17
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 18
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 19
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 20
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 21
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 22
</A>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>
<A>Chapter-5.pdf
</A>
<ul>
<li>
<A>Page 1
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 2
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 3
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 4
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 5
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 6
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 7
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 8
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 9
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 10
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 11
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 12
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 13
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 14
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 15
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 16
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 17
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 18
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 19
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 20
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 21
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 22
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 23
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 24
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 25
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 26
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 27
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 28
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 29
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 30
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 31
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 32
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 33
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 34
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 35
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 36
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 37
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 38
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 39
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 40
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 41
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 42
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 43
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 44
</A>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>
<A>Chapter-6.pdf
</A>
<ul>
<li>
<A>Page 1
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 2
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 3
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 4
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 5
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 6
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 7
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 8
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 9
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 10
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 11
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 12
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 13
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 14
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 15
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 16
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 17
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 18
</A>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>
<A>Chapter-2.pdf
</A>
<ul>
<li>
<A>Page 1
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 2
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 3
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 4
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 5
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 6
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 7
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 8
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 9
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 10
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 11
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 12
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 13
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 14
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 15
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 16
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 17
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 18
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 19
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 20
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 21
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 22
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 23
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 24
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 25
</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 26
</A>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
</HR>
<p>Chapter-1</p>
<section class="level2 numbered" id="id-.">
<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">TATHASTHU ! MAY IT BE SO!</h2>
<p>Just wandering through life's events passively?</p>
<p>A vast majority of the people are prone to passing through the events of life passively, accepting the outcome. Getting educated</p>
<p>from colleges/universities and settling in a job happens as a result of several known and unknown reasons which are commonly referred to as 'fate.' Subsequent to settling down in a job, the onward journey in the events of life happens according to their schedule with little or no exercise of the powers of the mind to control them. Is this acceptable to everybody? Surely, many do not settle with this but explore the other ways and means to control their life path.</p>
<p>Human beings are blessed with infinite mind powers and are at a great advantage compared to other living beings. But what is the use of such infinite powers of the mind when a vast majority does not venture to manifest even an insignificant part of it? How much power of the mind is actually utilized by individuals? How much capacity of the mind was used by Albert Einstein? Is Albert Einstein a benchmark to estimate the capacity of the mind? Spiritual sciences say that powers of the mind are infinite! If that be the case, then there cannot be any benchmarks for the capacity of the mind; there are only higher and higher expressions of the mind, with no limit.</p>
<p>Is it an extremely difficult task that can be followed only by a few?</p>
<p>In this modern age, we often hear many people talking about infinite powers</p>
<p>of the mind. We also have several books that highlight the powers of the mind. The following questions often daunt our minds when we fail to get success in spite of our hard work while our colleagues/neighbours get it easily.</p>
<p>i)What is the use of the infinite powers of the</p>
<p>One secret of success in life is for a man to be ready for his opportunity when it comes.</p>
<p>A pessimist sees the difficulty in every opportunity; an optimist sees the opportunity in every difficulty.</p>
<p>Winston Churchill</p>
<p>Man can alter his life by altering his thinking.</p>
<p>The energy of the mind is the essence of life.</p>
<p>mind when we are unable to use them practically</p>
<p>in day-to-day life? ii) What prevents us from becoming rich, influential, happy and admirable when the mind of each of us has infinite potential?</p>
<p>iii) Accepting that the mind has infinite powers and admitting that there are techniques to manifest these powers, why are we not able to harness our mind's infinite powers?</p>
<p>iv) Are the methods of manifesting the powers of the mind very difficult to follow? Can these be adopted only by a few people with extraordinary qualities?</p>
<p>v) Is each person not entitled to tap the powers of</p>
<p>his/her mind? Baffled by such a dilemma, we tend to compare physically visible things like money power, position and social influence, and ignore invisible factors like the ability to manifest the powers of the mind. Unable to go to the root cause of our problems and to address them effectively, we tend to run our busy life mechanically.</p>
<p>Let us now turn our attention to the facilities and support systems provided by God to achieve whatever we want.</p>
<p>Tathasthu Principle of Consciousness that bestows whatever we want!</p>
<p>A peculiar doubt haunts the minds of everybody.</p>
<p>Do we really get what we want? To understand this, we need to look at the “Tathashu! May it be so!” principles behind Universal Consciousness. But let us first look at the principles of 'Mother Earth' which, in turn, help us to</p>
<p>understand the principles of Universal Consciousness.</p>
<p>Tathasthu from Mother Earth</p>
<p>All of us understand very well the laws that govern our lives. We are also aware of the laws of physics, chemistry , mathematics and such allied sciences. Electricity flows from a higher potential to a lower potential; water flows from a higher level to a lower level. These facts are well known to all. One of the laws that everybody can readily understand is that whatever be the seeds we sow on Earth, a</p>
<p>corresponding tree will grow and fetch us the corresponding fruits. If we plant a papaya tree, we do not get mangoes. Mother Earth raises no objections to whatever may be the seeds that are planted and says, 'Tathasthu! May it be so!” thus helping us to get the corresponding tree and fruits. This can be readily understood by all.</p>
<p>Tathasthu from pure consciousness!</p>
<p>Each living being has an individual mind. But the mind is an inert matter (though made of subtle materials) and has no independent nature. The mind shines in the light of consciousness and appears to have an independent existence. It is like the Moon appearing to have light though it is the Sun's light which is reflected from the surface of the Moon. There is no individual consciousness; it is the same consciousness that shines behind the minds of all living beings and makes them appear to have independent powers.</p>
<p>This consciousness is pure energy and it manifests itself though individual minds. Consciousness has no form, no name and no qualities; also it can take up any name, any form or any quality that is superimposed on it. It always says, “Tathasthu! May it be so!” to whatever that is being asked by the mind. Our thoughts are the means by which we engrave names, forms and qualities on pure</p>
<p>are lions, you souls, pure, infinite and perfect. might of the is within</p>
<p>consciousness and thereby, achieve the things projected by using energy from consciousness. The basic principle behind the manifestation of this pure consciousness is that the overall qualities remain neutral, i.e. neither good nor bad. Hence, at any given time there always will be some bad thoughts engraving themselves on pure consciousness manifesting malevolence and there will be an equal number of good thoughts engraving themselves on pure consciousness generating benevolence.</p>
<p>All the works that we have around us are simply the display of thought</p>
<p>All that is created by man in this world - from the bullock cart to the jet engine - first cropped up in the mind as a thought and the energy needed for giving a material shape to it was drawn from pure consciousness. As Swami Vivekananda says, “All the actions that we see in</p>
<p>the world, all the movements in human society, all the works that we have around us, are simply the display of thought, the manifestation of the will of man. Machines or instruments,</p>
<table>
<tr>
<td>A man is but the product of </td>
<td>Obstacles are those frightful things </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>his thoughts what he thinks, </td>
<td>you see when you take your eyes </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>he becomes. </td>
<td>off your goal. </td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>Mahatma Gandhi</p>
<p>I can teach anybody how to get what they want out of life. The problem is that I can't find anybody who can tell me what they want.</p>
<p>Mark Twain</p>
<p>There are no limitations to the mind except those we acknowledge.</p>
<p>Napoleon Hill</p>
<p>cities, ships, or men - of - war, all these are simply</p>
<p>the manifestation of the will of man.” Hence our pure consciousness says, “Tathasthu! May it be so!” to whatever we seek from it. A person who broods upon evil thoughts will draw the necessary energy from pure consciousness and becomes bad. A person who dwells of ennobling thoughts draws the necessary energy from pure consciousness and becomes a noble man. However, the total quantum of the good and the bad that draw energy from pure consciousness is exactly equal and this ensures that the overall quality of pure consciousness is neutral.</p>
<p>Let us now look at what the scriptures say about this.</p>
<p>a) Gita: Lord Krishna</p>
<p>Different people pray to God for different things - some for money, some for name and fame, some others for health and yet some others for liberation. In the Bhagwad Gita, Lord Krishna says, “Whosoever worships me, for whatsoever desire, I meet him with that ”</p>
<p>.</p>
<p>b) Sri Ramakrishna: God is Kalpataru, but we pray standing near the Kalpataru</p>
<p>Sri Ramkrishna Paramahansa says, “God is the Kalpataru, the Wish-fulfilling Tree. You will certainly get whatever you ask of Him. But you must pray standing near the Kalpataru. Only then will your prayer be fulfilled. But you must remember another thing. God knows our inner feeling. A man gets the fulfillment of the desire he cherishes while practising sadhana. As one thinks, so one receives." Gospel-P. 481</p>
<p>c) Ask, it shall be given: Jesus Christ</p>
<p>In the Bible, Jesus Christ says, “Ask and it shall be given to you; seek and you will find; knock and the door will be opened to you.”</p>
<p>The assurance is that that we</p>
<p>shall be given whatever that is sought by us. However, it is not a free lunch. We get what we seek only when we readily utilize the</p>
<p>The will is stronger than anything else. Everything must go down before the will.</p>
<p>various opportunities presented to us with the right</p>
<p>spirit and hard work. If we get whatever we want, what about destiny and past karma?</p>
<p>Well, if we get whatever we ask, then what about destiny and past karma? This question has been hotly debated for several centuries. It is a war between the logic and emotions controlling the human brain's left and right hemispheres, respectively. The final outcome of all such discussions is, “Our lives are both predetermined and at the same time not.” If everything depends on destiny then there can be no evolution, no progress, no improvements and no change. If we accept destiny, then we must necessarily accept free will by which that destiny was created!</p>
<p>The doctrine of karma rests on the pillars of cause and effect, i.e. 'as you sow so shall you reap.' Everybody is equal and there are equal growth opportunities for everybody through free will. The merciless fate is not imposed forcefully on us and the door of free will is always open saying , 'Ask it shall be given' and hence, there is always an assurance of “Tathasthu ! May it be so!” from pure infinite consciousness. This is the inevitable process through which the future destiny of</p>
<p>Man has infinite power within himself, and he can realize it… It can be done; but he does not believe in it.</p>
<p>individuals is created. How is the present destiny of a person created ? Surely, it must be by the actions carried out by free will earlier. Then, how is a new destiny created? Surely it must be through the free will operating now.</p>
<p>Hence at any given instant of time, every living being has absolute freedom to think and act. But the result is always a combination of various factors. There are no restrictions whatsoever on our free will. It creates our future destiny. Then why should we be bogged down by destiny created by the past and ignore the powerful tool of free will that creates our future destiny? Pure consciousness is always at our disposal and it always depends on the direction in which we position ourselves.</p>
<p>We can become whatever we want -Swami Vivekananda</p>
<p>While giving a series of lectures on 'Karma Yoga' in Western countries to throw light on the topic ' Karma in its effect on character ', Swami Vivekananda said, “Our Karma determines what we deserve and what we can assimilate. We are responsible for what we are; and whatever we wish ourselves to be, we have the power to make ourselves. If what we are now has been the result of our own past actions, it certainly follows that whatever we wish to be in future can be produced by our present actions; so we have to know how to act. You will say, 'What is the use of learning how to work? Everyone works in some way or other in this world.' But there is such a thing as frittering away our energies. With regard to Karma-Yoga, the Gita says that it is doing work with cleverness and as a science; by knowing how to work, one can obtain the greatest results. You must remember that all work is simply to bring out the power of the mind which is already there, to wake up the soul. The power is inside every man, so is knowing; the different works are like blows to bring them out, to cause these giants to wake up.”</p>
<p>Thought is the primary tool to ask God whatever we desire</p>
<p>Everybody understands prayer is the means to ask God. But everybody may not believe in God. Whether we do it voluntarily or involuntarily, every thought and wish that emanate from our minds comes from pure consciousness. All the minds of living beings are illuminated by the same pure consciousness. Thoughts emanate continuously from our minds thereby giving a name, shape and <span>quality to our pure consciousness which is formless, nameless and beyond attributes. The required energy is drawn from pure consciousness to materialize what is being asked for by the mind. The “Tathasthu! May it be so!” assures us that we will get what we asked by presenting us with opportunities which are to be grabbed. We have to translate these thoughts into things by necessary actions. Hence, the primary tool to ask from God or pure consciousness is thought. As Professor William James, an American psychologist and philosopher, rightly pointed out, “ Man can alter his life by altering his thinking.” </span></p>
<p>How does the help of God come to us when we seek something?</p>
<p>If we pray to God for the health of a person who needs to undergo surgery, God himself does not come to his house and cure him through a painless surgery without any hospital bills to be paid. But surely God will extend his help through relatives raising the money needed for the surgery, friends assisting him in the hospital and finally, through the expertise of the doctor to make the surgery highly successful.</p>
<p>Similarly, if we pray to God for Rs. 1 crore, he does not pack bundles of Rs. 1,000/- notes in a gunny bag and drop the bag in your worship room. The response to prayer comes in different forms and provides guidance for how to move forward. We need to follow the directions and opportunities sent by God; we should work on them by readily grabbing them.</p>
<p>Explaining that prayer to God facilitates solutions in many ways, Abdul Kalam - in his book “Wings of Fire”- writes, “This could come from an encounter with another person, from a word, a gesture or even a look. Many a time it could happen even through a book, a conversation, some phrase, even a line of poem or mere sight of a picture.”</p>
<p>If we ignore all the help extended in response to our prayers, then our chances to realize for what we pray may be less. Let us look at a nice fable that illustrates this point.</p>
<p>Grab the solutions sent by God in response to prayers and implement them</p>
<p>There was a village near a sea coast. The meteorological department sent out a warning about impending floods and cyclone. The district administrative authorities deputed their staff to the village to persuade the villagers to move to safe places as a precautionary measure. There lived an adamant and dogmatic devotee of God in the village. He refused to move out of the village and prayed to God to save his life. Meanwhile, the floods started inundating the village and the water level started rising. In response to the prayers of the devotee, God created a thought in the mind of the District Superintendent of Police to make his team take another round of the village to check that all were safe. The police team reached the village in its jeep and found the lonely devotee of God left alone in the village. They tried to persuade him to come along with them. But the adamant and dogmatic devotee refused to go with them. He was convinced that God Himself would come and save him.</p>
<p>Time and tide wait for no man! The water level kept on rising in the village and the devotee went up to the second floor of his house and waited for God to come and rescue him. God was very worried about the devotee and made another attempt to save him. A fisherman from the village who had</p>
<p>The only limit to our realization of tomorrow will be our doubts of today.</p>
<p>There seems to be some perverse human characteristic that likes to make easy things difficult.</p>
<p>Warren Buffer</p>
<p>In order to succeed, your desire for success should be greater than your fear of failure.</p>
<p>Destiny is not a matter of chance, but of choice. Not something to wish for, but to attain.</p>
<p>William Jennings Bryan</p>
<p>gone out to the sea for fishing was returning due to the bad weather conditions. God created an idea in his mind to</p>
<p>look out for any person needing help. Driven by this unconscious thought, the boatman rowed his boat towards the devotee standing on the second floor of his house. He tried to persuade the devotee repeatedly to come with him in the boat and save his life. But the devotee refused to leave his house and stubbornly insisted that God would come and save him.</p>
<p>With a further rise in the water level, the devotee was forced to climb to the terrace of the house. He waited for God to come. The anxiety of God increased due to the foolishness of His devotee who was intensely praying but refusing to accept the help sent in response to his prayers. God wanted to rescue the devotee at any cost and He created a thought in the mind of the State Home Minister to initiate an aerial survey by helicopter to ensure that nobody was left in the inundated village. Accordingly, the State Home Minister immediately picked up his mobile phone and ordered that the Disaster Management Group immediately conduct an aerial survey of the flooded village. The army swung into action with a helicopter and finding a lonely person on the terrace of a house, flew the helicopter towards him and tried to persuade him to come along with them. But, as usual, our dogmatic devotee refused to be rescued. He insisted that God would come and save him.</p>
<p>The water level kept on rising and the dogmatic devotee was washed away in the floods. He reached God after death and started vilifying God saying that God did not bother to come down to rescue him in spite of his intense prayers. God explained to the devotee that he had sent help three times - first, by sending the police jeep; next by sending the fisherman and finally, by sending the helicopter. God reiterated the famous proverb to the devotee, “God helps those who help themselves.”</p>
<p>God is the third type of doctor</p>
<p>Sri Ramakrishna Paramahansa used to speak of three types of doctors. The first type of doctors examine the patients and just issue a prescription. They do not bother to check whether the patients are taking the medicine and recovering. The second type of doctors issue the prescriptions and persuade their patients to take medicine regularly but they do not bother to keep track of the level of recuperation of each patient from the disease. The third type of doctors are the best doctors. They not</p>
<p>only prescribe medicines but also force open the mouths of the patients and administer the drug. These doctors are very much concerned about the recovery of their patients. But there are some patients who vomit the administered drug and the doctor is helpless in such a situation. Similarly, when we ask or pray for help from God, we should bank upon the opportunities sent by God through various means and act upon them. If we do not take advantage of the opportunities presented by God to us, then even God cannot help us vindicating the proverb, “God helps those who help themselves”.</p>
<p>Let's do a recap!</p>
<p>Though there appear to be individual minds, the pure consciousness that gives energy to all minds is the same. This pure consciousness is neutral in nature without name, form or attribute. It is the thought impressed on pure consciousness that gives it a name, form or attribute. The necessary energy needed for materializing the projections of thought are drawn from pure consciousness. This pure consciousness always says, “Tathashu! May it be so!” on whatever is being asked by the thought. “Ask, it shall be given” is its principle and whatever is asked is given regardless of its being either good or bad.</p>
<p>One needs to understand the conditions under which “Tathasthu! May it be so!” is granted. There is no free lunch for anybody. Pure consciousness gives many clues, directions and solutions to the mind based on what is being asked. The individual mind has to grab the opportunities presented to it and act upon them.</p>
<p>Hence, thought is the primary tool that governs our lives. Changing the thought changes our lives. Thought is nothing but asking something from pure consciousness.</p>
<p>Chapter - 2</p>
<p>PAY FOR EXCELLENCE AND GET SUCCESS, WEALTH AND FAME, ALL FREE OF COST !!!</p>
<p>Buy '1' get '3' free!</p>
<p>All of us are aware of the marketing gimmicks followed by several companies with the offer of “Buy '1' Get '1' free!”. Everybody will readily agree that the best offer is to “Buy none, get one free!!!”, but unfortunately this is not possible. A fantastic offer would be -“Buy '1' Get '3' free!” In this offer, buy '1' refers to attaining excellence through perseverance and hard work supported by a systematic approach while get '3' free refers to Success, Wealth and Fame which come along with excellence at free of cost.</p>
<p>Attaining success, wealth and fame is the natural desire of most human beings. But very few can understand that these are the by-products that come naturally in the process of making the main product called 'Excellence'.</p>
<p>What is personal excellence and how is it achieved?</p>
<p>'Excellence' is often defined as the quality of being excellent; the state of possessing good qualities of an eminent degree; exalted merit and superiority in virtue. It can be summarized as the character of a man. Similar to the characteristics of a person, every organization has its own D.N.A. which represent the overall quality of individuals that make up the organization. Here is how we can all achieve excellence.</p>
<p>The Step by Step process of attaining excellence!</p>
<p>We have to attain excellence (character) to change our destiny. But we cannot directly attain excellence and there is no shortcut for this long journey. First we need to change our thoughts as it is the thoughts</p>
<p>Be a man first, my friend, and you will see how all those things (money, name, fame) and the rest will follow of themselves after you.</p>
<p>If there is no passion in your life, then have you really lived? Find your passion, whatever it may be. Become it, and let it become you and you will find great things happen FOR you, TO you and BECAUSE of you.</p>
<p>We are what we repeatedly do. Excellence, then, is not an act but a habit.</p>
<p>T. Alan Armstrong</p>
<p>If your ship doesn’t come in, swim out to meet it!</p>
<p>Aristotle</p>
<p>Let no feeling of discouragement prey upon you, and in the end you are sure to succeed.</p>
<p>Jonathan Winters</p>
<p>Abraham Lincoln</p>
<p>that drive our actions. When we repeat these actions prompted by ideal thoughts, they become our habits. When we repeat these habits they become a part of our character which represents our qualities of excellence. Hence, the journey to excellence is 'Change thoughts to ideal thoughts, make these ideal thoughts dominant by constantly thinking of them and dreaming of them - then implement actions to synchronize with the new ideal thoughts- establish habits through repeated actions - then attain character (excellence) through repeated habits'. To understand this further, let us turn our attention to a story aptly explained by Swami Vivekananda while giving lectures on Raja Yoga in America:</p>
<p>“There was once a minister to a great king. He fell into disgrace. The king, as a punishment, ordered him to be shut up in the top of a very high tower. This was done, and the minister was left there to perish. He had a faithful wife, however, who came to the tower at night and called to her husband at the top to know what she could do to help him. He told her to return to the tower the following night and bring with her a long rope, some stout twine, pack thread, silken thread, a beetle, and a little honey. Wondering much, the good wife obeyed her husband, and brought him the desired articles. The husband directed her to attach the silken thread firmly to the beetle, then to smear its horns with a drop of honey, and to set it free on the wall of the tower, with its head pointing upwards. She obeyed all these instructions, and the beetle started on its long journey. Smelling the honey ahead it slowly crept onwards, in the hope of reaching the honey,</p>
<p>until at last it reached to top of the tower, when the minister grasped the beetle, and got possession of the silken thread. He told his wife to tie the other end to the pack thread, and after he had drawn up the pack thread, he repeated the process with the stout twine, and lastly with the rope. Then the rest was easy. The minister descended from the tower by means of the rope, and made his escape.”</p>
<p>In the above example, the silk thread represents our thought, pack thread represents our constant thinking and dreaming of the thought which make it dominant and strong; the stout twine represent our actions; and the long rope represent our habits and qualities of excellence formed by repeated actions. We can see from the story that it</p>
<p>Work, work the idea, the plan, my boys, my brave, noble, good souls --to the wheel, to the wheel put your shoulders! Stop not to look back for name, or fame, or any such nonsense.</p>
<p>is only the rope that saved the life of the minister, but the journey began with silk thread thereby facilitating grip on other higher and higher things.</p>
<p>Failures through short cut methods</p>
<p>Nobody wants to pass through a Hell full of struggles and hard work to attain excellence. Each of us directly wants the Heaven of 'Success, Wealth & Fame'. A vast majority of people attempt to use shortcut methods and manipulations to attain success, wealth and fame directly without undergoing the pain of attaining excellence (character). Though, in certain cases, there may be successes by manipulation and tricks, these will not last long . It is like</p>
<p>attempting to produce the by-products without manufacturing the main product. But if we attain the main product whose name is 'Excellence' , then its' by-products, viz. Success, Wealth, Name and Fame, Health etc., will automatically come to us.</p>
<p>If there is any road to Heaven, it is through Hell : Swami Vivekananda</p>
<p>Swami Vivekananda says, “The real desire for the ideal. Everything comes easy after that... The struggle is the great lesson. Mind you, the great benefit in this life is struggle. It is through that we pass. If there is any road to Heaven, it is through Hell. Through Hell to Heaven is always the way. When the soul has wrestled with circumstance and has met death, a thousand times death on the way, but nothing daunted has struggled forward again and again and yet again -- then the soul comes out as a giant and laughs at the ideal he has been struggling for, because he finds how much greater is he than the ideal.”</p>
<p>Starting from the root of the problem!</p>
<p>Swami Vivekananda says, “Once lay hold of one link of the chain and the whole must come after it</p>
<p>by degrees. Water the root of the tree and the whole tree is watered. It is of little advantage to waste time to water each leaf.”</p>
<p>We need to start with changing our thoughts to change our lives. Hence our thought is the control button to change our action. All of us use a T.V.</p>
<p>remote control to change channels and the moment we change the channel, a new serial will run on the same T.V. screen. Similarly, when we alter our thoughts, the programmes in our life will also change.</p>
<p>We have to learn the rules of the life-game and master the art of playing it well. It is not just learning about the techniques of manifesting the powers of the mind but also how to act upon them!</p>
<p>Swami Vivekananda summarizes the nitty - gritty of attaining excellence</p>
<p>Swami Vivekananda says, “ Take up one idea. Make that one idea your life -- think of it, dream of it, live on that idea. Let the brain, muscles, nerves, every part of your body, be full of that idea, and just leave every other idea alone. This is the way to success.”</p>
<p>In the above message of Swami Vivekananda, the entire process of achieving excellence is packed firmly. Start with the thought (idea) and changing that thought changes our lives. Make those thoughts the dominant force by constantly dreaming of them. Then live up to the idea by acting upon it. Let the brain, muscles, nerves and every part of your body mould your character centering on the idea.</p>
<p>Take up one idea. Make that one idea your life –-- think of it, dream of it, live on that idea. Let the brain, muscles, nerves, every part of your body, be full of that idea, and just leave every other idea alone. This is the way to success.</p>
<p>CharacterHabitsActionsDreams</p>
<p>Ideas</p>
<p>Dream</p>
<p>Let the central idea</p>
<p><span>Let the become</span>brain,</p>
<p>of the</p>
<p><span>your Live muscles, </span>character.</p>
<p>up the nerves idea and every by part your</p>
<p>idea</p>
<p>acting</p>
<p>body</p>
<p>Take</p>
<p>day in</p>
<p>upon it.</p>
<p>mould</p>
<p>and</p>
<p>you on</p>
<p>that idea.</p>
<p>up day out .one idea that change your life.</p>
<p>39</p>
<p>Understand the secrets of great men and apply them to your needs</p>
<p>Swami Vivekananda says, “ The history of the world is the history of a few men who had faith in themselves… We have had such men at all periods of the world's history and at all times…. Suppose we can investigate these laws and understand their secrets and apply them to our own needs; it follows that we grow.”</p>
<p>What is the greatness behind the great people across the World? Success is not a secret; its greatness lies in principles followed in attaining it and these principles are universal and not personal. It comes to whosoever follows certain principles/processes. The success, wealth or fame acquired by them is because of their adherence to certain processes of excellence. Leave aside their glory, fame and wealth, and only follow the processes followed by them. Emulate those processes of excellence unhesitatingly and execute them meticulously. If you read their success stories, the process behind the success will be very clear to you as one cannot create a success story without enumerating the processes that were followed. All successful people start with changing their thoughts to change their lives. They dream about these thoughts - day in and day out - so that these become the dominant thoughts of their minds. Then they incessantly put these into action. These actions create systematic habits in them which will shape their character (qualities of excellence). The process is the same in the lives of all great persons. Success, wealth and fame come to them as a corollary to their attainment of excellence in their chosen ideas. Whether they want it or not, the success, wealth and fame follows these people of excellence like the faithful dog! None of the great persons ever struggled for fame and wealth. These came to them free of cost along with excellence.</p>
<p>Look at the universal process behind great people</p>
<p>Look at the success stories of Bill Gates, Henry Ford, Dr Narayana Murthy, Ratan Tata, Abdul Kalam, M S Subbulakshmi, Sachin Tendulkar, Albert Einstein, Thomas Edison and Abraham Lincoln. The process behind them is the same and as rightly presented by Swami Vivekananda, “Take up one idea. Make that one idea your life -- think of it, dream of it, live on that idea. Let the brain, muscles, nerves, every part of your body, be full of that idea, and just leave every other idea alone. This is the way to success.”</p>
<p>Character follows the person from birth to birth</p>
<p>All of us understand long-term investments like purchasing housing plots and flats in posh areas of a city, and purchasing blue chip company shares. Also the money invested in getting educated is a right example of long-term investment. But there is a wonderful long-term investment that many do not know. This wonderful investment grows and multiplies not only in the present birth of an individual but also in his subsequent births. This investment is nothing but our character and it is always carried over from one birth to the next birth. Hence, all the struggles and hardships (investments) we undertake in building our individual character is not only a blessing in our present birth but will also follow us in our next birth.</p>
<p>According to Hindu scriptures, there are three different bodies in every human being, i.e. physical body, subtle body and causal body. Animals give food only to the physical body. However, a human being must give food for all the three bodies. The food for the physical body is what we eat every day. Intellectual pursuits, philosophy, science, engineering, technology, commerce, management and other such objective matters are the food for</p>
<p>Physical Body Subtle Body Causal Body</p>
<p>
</p>
<p>All children of a given parent do not have the same character</p>
<p>Very often we find wide variations in the characters of children in a given family. Though born to the same parents, brought up in the same environment, studying at the same school and being taught by the same teachers, we see a wide variation in the character of children in every family. While one may have criminal tendencies, the other may possess noble tendencies; while one cheats everybody, the other one helps everybody. Why this vast difference in the children of the same</p>
<p>Success is walking from failure to failure with no loss of enthusiasm.</p>
<p>Determine that the thing can and shall be done and then we shall find the way.</p>
<p>Winston Churchill</p>
<p>Opportunity is missed by most people because it is dressed in overalls and looks like work.</p>
<p>Abraham Lincoln</p>
<p>Happiness is not in the mere possession of money; it lies in the joy of achievement, in the thrill of creative effort.</p>
<p>Thomas Edison</p>
<p>family? Character is not inherited from parents but is brought forward from one's previous birth to the present through casual body and this can be further improved by persistent efforts in the present birth.</p>
<p>Persistent work, through ages and ages: Swami Vivekananda</p>
<p>Addressing public lectures on Karma Yoga in western countries, Swami Vivekananda said, ' The men of mighty will the world has produced have all been tremendous workers --gigantic souls, with wills powerful enough to overturn worlds, wills they got by persistent work, through ages, and ages. Such a gigantic will as that of a Buddha or a Jesus could not be obtained in one life, for we know who their fathers were. It is not known that their fathers ever spoke a word for the good of mankind. Millions and millions of</p>
<p>carpenters like Joseph had gone; millions are still living. Millions and millions of petty kings like Buddha's father had been in the world. If it was only a case of hereditary transmission, how do you account for this petty</p>
<p>Character has to be established through a thousand stumbles.</p>
<p>If money is your hope for independence you will never have it. The only real security that a man will have in this world is a reserve of knowledge, experience, and ability.</p>
<p>Our greatest glory consists not in never falling, but in rising every time we fall.</p>
<p>Henry Ford</p>
<p>Oliver Goldsmith</p>
<p>Character cannot be developed in ease and quiet. Only through experience of trial and suffering can the soul be strengthened, vision cleared, ambition inspired, and success achieved.</p>
<p>Character is like a tree and reputation its shadow. The shadow is what we think it is and the tree is the real thing.</p>
<p>Helen Keller</p>
<p>Abraham Lincoln</p>
<p>prince, who was not, perhaps, obeyed by his own servants, producing this son, whom half a world worships? How do you explain the gulf between the carpenter and his son, whom millions of human beings worship as God? It cannot be solved by the theory of heredity. The gigantic will which Buddha and Jesus threw over the world, whence did it come? Whence came this accumulation of power? It must have been there through ages and ages, continually growing bigger and bigger, until it burst on society in a Buddha or a Jesus, even rolling down to the present day.'</p>
<p>Carrot Vs Vitamin A capsules</p>
<p>Let us now take another example to understand how the success and glory brought in by qualities of excellence are far more powerful than those acquired by some shortcut methods. All of us know that the carrot, a vegetable, is very rich in Vitamin A. We can also get Vitamin A quickly by taking Vitamin A capsules. But Vitamin A capsules are to be taken in limited doses as per the advice of the doctor. If one consumes a complete bottle of Vitamin A capsules in one dose, one will have to be admitted in the hospital for consuming an overdose of this vitamin. However, if one eats one Kg of carrots - which may give us Vitamin A in a much higher dose -there is no health risk at all and one, in fact, becomes more healthy. The fact is that the carrot produces many enzymes along with Vitamin A, while Vitamin A capsule does not contain the other rich enzymes of the carrot. In a similar way, if one is trying to obtain wealth and fame through shortcut methods without passing through the long journey of attaining excellence, one is exposed to dangers. Grabbing a little fame/wealth through gimmicks and tricks may work in a limited way. But long-term glory, name, fame and everlasting success cannot be achieved by such tricks. Perpetual success, glory, wealth, name and fame can only be achieved through the long journey of excellence.</p>
<p>All of us are aware of 'World Class Companies'. These companies/organizations have qualities of excellence. Profits are the by-products that come naturally to these companies in their journey of excellence. They focus on quality of goods/services, employee's welfare, supplier's sustainability, customer's needs, shareholder's rewards and the welfare of needy people through Corporate Social Responsibility activities. The products/services of such admirable companies are always preferred by customers. Profits come to them only after taking care of the other factors stated above. But the wonder is that such World Class Companies have huge profits and the secret behind their success is their focus on excellence.</p>
<p>Lord Indra learns secrets from Prahlada</p>
<p>Lord Indra is the King of Gods or Devas and is the Lord of Heaven. He is also the God of war, storms and rains. He is one of the chief deities in the Rigveda besides being the ruler of a direction ('Dikpalaka'). However, his reputation suffered severe set-backs many times due to his indulging in carnal pleasures by inflicting many kinds of mischief to exploit others and he was punished for these transgressions.</p>
<p>Prahlada was born in the family of Rakshasas (demons) but was a great devotee of Lord Narayana. He is famed for his exclusive devotion to Lord Vishnu and often quoted as a role model for devotees of God. Due to his qualities of excellence, Prahlada became King of the three worlds.</p>
<p><span><span>Lord Indra wanted name, fame and success like Prahlada. He approached Rishi Brihaspati and requested his guidance in this matter. Brihaspati </span><span>directed Lord Indra to approach Parasurama (Bhargava Rama). Accordingly, Lord Indra approached Bhargava Rama, who in turn advised him to directly approach Prahlada. Lord Indra approached Prahlada disguised as a Brahmin and started serving Prahlada to learn the techniques of achieving success, name and fame. Prahlada was very much pleased by the service of Lord Indra in the disguise of a brahmin. Seizing this opportunity, Indra beseeched Prahlada to teach him the secrets behind his success, fame and glory. Prahlada replied, “O Brahmin! It is the character by which I was able to win over the three worlds. I am never proud of being a king. I obey the instructions of my Guru Sukracharya and serve all elders with due respect. Whenever anybody approaches me for help, I shall extend whatever help that I can. These are the qualities of excellence. Success, glory, name </span></span>and fame came of their own accord as I followed qualities of excellence.”</p>
<p>Duryodhana seeks guidance from Dhritarashtra</p>
<p>All of us are aware of the wicked nature of Duryodhana in the Mahabharata. He enjoyed wealth and power but there was no glory, name and fame attached to him as these come as a corollary to attaining qualities of excellence. Yudhisthira has earned a great name, fame and glory because of his qualities of excellence. Duryodhana wondered whether there was any shortcut way to acquire name, fame and glory. Even though Duryodhana never respected and obeyed his father, Dhritarashtra, he faked a brave face of humbleness and sought the guidance of his father. The experienced Dhritarashtra advised his son: “O my dear son! If you want to attain name, fame and glory like Yudhisthira, the only way for it is to acquire character enriched by qualities of excellence.”</p>
<p>Duryodhana thought that name, fame and glory can be attained permanently by directly approaching them through shortcuts and that his father's varied experiences in life would provide several tips to him . But Dhritarashtra's advice was clear: the only way to attain eternal name, fame and glory is to imbibe the qualities of excellence.</p>
<p>Let's do a recap!</p>
<p>The methods followed by great people across the world are same, i.e. change the thoughts, synchronize the actions with these thoughts, turn these thoughts into habits and attain excellence in the chosen field. The attainment of excellence in the chosen field yields by-products like success, wealth and fame free of cost. One should not attempt tricks and manipulations to attain fame and wealth without attaining excellence. Another wonderful thing about the character which represents personal values is that it is carried over from birth to birth through the causal body. With this carrying - forward of character from birth to birth, an individual can become a mighty soul by continuously developing it over a series of births.</p>
<p>Chapter - 3</p>
<p>THINK OF IT, DREAM OF IT AND LIVE ON IT</p>
<p>Swami Vivekananda's blueprint for success says the next step after taking up an idea is to think of it, dream of it and live on it. It is also called 'Visualization' or 'constantly dreaming of goals'. It is a process of creating and seeing a mental picture of what we want to achieve. This should occur as a continuous process till the time we attain our cherished goal.</p>
<p>Let us look at Swami Vivekananda's style of focusing on a single idea. Describing his state of mind with focus on the single idea of fulfilling his life mission of uplifting the people, Swami Vivekananda wrote a letter to his friend: “Two years of physical suffering have taken away twenty years of my life. Well, but the soul changeth not, does it? It is there, the same madcap Atman, mad upon one idea, intent and intense.”</p>
<p>Only our dominant thoughts drive our actions</p>
<p>In the previous chapters we saw that our ideas (thoughts) engrave forms on our pure consciousness and draw the necessary energy from it to materialize the ideas into reality. Thoughts drive our physical body to carry out actions just like a rail engine hauls the coaches.</p>
<p>However, there are several thoughts arising in our minds and the weaker thoughts amongst them do not drive our actions but remain as mere wish lists, yielding no practical results. These are like weeds in the garden of our mind that eat away the precious resources of the mind and produce no results.</p>
<p>Swami Vivekananda says, “By knowing how to work, one can obtain the greatest results. You must remember that all this work is simply to bring out the power of the mind which is already there, to wake up the soul. The power is inside every man, so is the knowing; the different works are like blows to bring them out, to cause these giants to wake up.”</p>
<p>Visualization: Positioning thoughts as dominant thoughts that need action</p>
<p>We may think of many things but all the thoughts do not lead to action. Among the thoughts, only dominant thoughts drive our actions while the weaker thoughts just consume our mind's capacity without yielding any practical results. So, thoughts requiring action should be positioned as dominant thoughts. This can be achieved through visualization / constantly thinking ( dreaming) of ideas that we desire to achieve. When the same ideas are thought, again and again, they become dominant thoughts and propel us into action.</p>
<p>Ichcha Shakti & Kriya Shakti</p>
<p>Hindu scriptures describe 'Ichcha Shakti' and 'Kriya Shakti'. 'Ichcha shakti' is the power of intention or the power of the will. The implementation part of intentions is executed by 'kriya shakti.' We need a right combination of 'Ichcha shakti' and 'Kriya shakti'.</p>
<p>Think all of you that you are the infinitely powerful Atman, and see what strength comes out.</p>
<p>This is the way to success: Swami Vivekananda</p>
<p>Let us once again remember Swami Vivekananda's message: “Take one thing up and do it, and see the end of it, and before you have seen the end, do not give it up. He who can become mad with an idea, he alone sees light. Those that only take a nibble here and a nibble there will never attain anything. They may titillate their nerves for a moment, but there it will end. Take up one idea. Make that one idea your life -- think of it, dream of it, live on that idea. Let the brain, muscles, nerves, every part of your body, be full of that idea, and just leave every other idea alone. This is the way to success.”</p>
<p>Go to work, the rest will come:</p>
<p>Let us now look at one of the letters written by Swami Vivekananda to his Madras disciple, Alasinga, persuading him to move from an architect's role to an engineer's role so that his visualization could be translated into reality.</p>
<p>U.S.A. 1894 Dear Alasinga, Listen to an old story. A lazy tramp sauntering along the road saw an old man sitting at the door of his house and stopped to inquire of him the whereabouts of a certain place. "How far is such and such a village?" he asked. The old man remained silent. The man repeated his query several times. Still there was no answer. Disgusted at this, the traveller turned to go away. The old man then stood up and said, "The village of__ is only a mile from here." "What!" said the tramp, "Why did you not speak when I asked you before?" "Because then", said the old man, "you seemed so halting and careless about proceeding, but now you are starting off in good earnest, and you have a right to an answer." Will you remember this story, my son? Go to work, the rest will come: "Whosoever not trusting in anything else but Me, rests on Me, I supply him with everything he needs" (Gita, IX.22). This is no dream.</p>
<p>Yours Swami Vivekananda</p>
<p>What is the contribution of visualization in attaining our goals?</p>
<p>Before proceeding further into the study of the marvelous powers of visualization in attaining our cherished goals, let us take a look at two common examples.</p>
<p>A dream home or dream car is owned by many people. In India, every common man's wish is to have his own home and an upper middle class family's wish is to own a car. Though this is wishful thinking by many, only those who can constantly dream about their desired thoughts can progress towards the desired goal. Visualization enables them to give strength to their thoughts and shows the way forward. It is their visualization/dream that drives them to search all possibilities and grab the opportunities. They stand as testimonials to the proverb, 'Where there is will, there is a way'. They imagine - day and in and day out -that they already have a house/car that they wished for and strongly</p>
<p>attract these into their lives. They imagine various situations utilizing these assets. Their minds see the non-reality as a reality and they succeed in achieving what they desire. This is all due to the infinite pure consciousness giving its blessings to these most ambitious people: 'Tathasthu! May it be so!'</p>
<p>Let us now take another common example to understand how visualization yields fruits. Visualization plays a vital role in steering the mind in the direction of the things most sought after by us. Let us now look at how a singer, a dancer, an artist, a speaker and an athlete bank upon the visualization as the means to achieve the end-result. They repeatedly imagine that they are giving live performances while doing the rehearsals. They are steering their minds towards the end-result. The visualization works as an energy spinner for them to practise more and more to achieve perfection to reach their goal.</p>
<p>Having studied these two examples to get quick insights into the effects of visualization, let us now look at how constantly thinking of attaining</p>
<p>All men who have achieved great things have been great dreamers.</p>
<p>Orison Swett Marden</p>
<p>Those who dream by day are cognizant of many things that escape those who dream only at night.</p>
<p>Our truest life is when we are in dreams awake.</p>
<p>Nothing happens unless first a dream.</p>
<p>Carl Sandburg</p>
<p>our cherished goals translates the dreams into reality. It fetches us seven invauable benefits!</p>
<p>Seven Invaluable Benefits from the constant dreaming of the chosen goal!</p>
<p>i)Visualization gives wings to our thoughts. ii)Visualization persuades us. iii)Visulization makes law of attraction yield</p>
<p>fruits to our thoughts. iv) Visualization creates fire in the belly. v) Visulization opens the magical eye that spots</p>
<p>opporunities in problems.</p>
<p>vi) Visulization makes us a devotee of the goal and grants us the goal. vii) Visualization generates hope. Let us look at these in detail.</p>
<p>i)Visualization gives wings to our thoughts</p>
<p>Visualization gives wings of imagination to our thoughts so that they soar high to give the acceleration to surge ahead. Visualization refers to the imagining of oneself to be in the state of having achieved the end result. It facilitates us into translating the wishful thinking into reality. The more we visualize, the more will be the positive energy in us to propel our actions towards the end result. It changes our mind-set and floods us with excessive energy to surge ahead.</p>
<p>ii)Persuasive powers of visualization</p>
<p>While carrying out our activities, we co-ordinate with several people and get involved in the process of persuasion and follow-up to motivate them. Charity begins at home! We need the functions of persuasion, follow-up and motivation to be carried out first within ourselves. Who does this job within us? It is done by none other than our constant dreaming of things that we want to achieve. It generates self-motivation fueled</p>
<p>by the burning desire to succeed generated by constantly thinking of the same idea.</p>
<p>The power of visualization drives away our fears and enables us to move forward. A person with great visualization never gives up his mission even when he faces stumbling blocks. He moves forward by finding solutions and does not rest till he attains his goal. Visualization provides fresh energy every time we are stuck and gives us a push to move forward. It is the great persuasion power from within.</p>
<p>iii)Visualization makes law of attraction yield fruits to our thoughts</p>
<p>Most of us are aware of the law of attraction. It simply says that you attract into your life whatever you think about. Your dominant thought will find a way to manifest itself. A drunkard attracts another drunkard, a devotee attracts another devotee, a successful man attracts another successful man and a pessimist attracts another pessimist. When you dream of things -again and again - what is going to happen? We attract similar things into our lives. Constant thinking of the same goals magnetizes and attracts the needed things into our lives.</p>
<p>While delivering lectures on 'Karma Yoga' in the Western countries, Swami Vivekananda said, “Just as every action that emanates from us comes back to us as reaction, even so our actions may act on other people and theirs on us. Perhaps all of you have observed it as a fact that when persons do evil actions, they become more and more evil, and when they begin to do good, they become stronger and stronger and learn to do good at all times. This intensification of the influence of action cannot be explained on any other ground than that we can act and react upon each other. To take an illustration from physical science, when I am doing a certain action, my mind may be said to be in a certain state of vibration; all minds which are in similar circumstances will have the tendency to be affected by my mind. If there are different musical instruments tuned alike in one room, all of you may have noticed that when one is struck, the others have the tendency to vibrate so as to give</p>
<p>We are what our thoughts have made us; so take care about what you think. Words are secondary. Thoughts live; they travel far.</p>
<p>You cannot depend on your eyes when your imagination is out of focus.</p>
<p>Big thinking precedes great achievement.</p>
<p>Wilferd Peterson</p>
<p>If you have ideas, you have the main asset you need, and there isn't any limit to what you can do with your business and your life. Ideas are any man's greatest asset.</p>
<p>To the person who does not know where he wants to go there is no favorable wind.</p>
<p>Seneca</p>
<p>the same note . So all minds that have the same tension, so to say, will be equally affected by the same thought. Of course, this influence of thought on mind will vary according to distance and other causes, but the mind is always open to affection. Suppose I am doing an evil act, my mind is in a certain state of vibration, and all minds in the universe, which are in a similar state, have the possibility of being affected by the vibration of my mind. So, when I am doing a good action, my mind is in another state of vibration; and all minds similarly strung have the possibility of being affected by my mind; and this power of mind upon mind is more or less according as the force of the tension is greater or less.”</p>
<p>iv) Visualization creates fire in the belly</p>
<p>Self-motivation facilitates us to move forward through our own inner fire. While we get inspiration from other great persons, self-motivation is generated internally by constantly thinking of our cherished goals. Self-motivation is far more powerful than inspiration derived from others. It is relevant here to remember this quote of Abraham Lincoln: “Your own resolution to succeed is more important than</p>
<p>any other.” Self -motivation generated by visualization is like a self-driven engine. It uses the mind's fuel and creates an urge to act. In colloquial terms this is called 'fire in the belly'.</p>
<p>v) Visualization opens the magical eye that spots opportunities in problems</p>
<p>A person who constantly dreams of his chosen</p>
<p>goal develops wonderful inner eyes that spot only opportunities shining behind his problems and grabs all the opportunities with the fire in his belly. Such a mind - with</p>
<p>X-ray talents - sees all the possibilities available to it to move forward. We never do the things that we do not like at all; we do things only when we see clearly the benefits from doing it.</p>
<p>However, if a person has negative thoughts about a goal, then he will only see the problems in all the opportunities and will let them slip off. This type of person keeps on waiting for the best opportunities in which there are no problems at all! He never bothers to seriously think whether there exist opportunities in which there are no problems at all! When a person does not see the benefits, he never moves forward.</p>
<p>vi) Visualization makes us a devotee of the goal and grants us the goal</p>
<p>When a person likes a cherished goal, he becomes a devotee of it and worships it. His entire mental energy gets channelized towards it. As his love for the cherished goal increases by the constant</p>
<p>thinking of it, his inner energy for its execution gets accelerated by leaps and bounds. Then his mind becomes a fountain of energy by constantly dreaming of the goal. When there is a liking for a goal, the man is moved by several mysterious strings towards its fulfillment. But if a man does not like the same thing, he will move in the opposite direction.</p>
<p>vii) Visualization generates hope</p>
<p>A mind constantly thinking of the same goal becomes positive. This positive nature of the mind nurtures hope in us. Hope is the prime motivational power that drives our lives. It is only because of hope that human beings continue to live on Earth. Hope gives continuity to our actions.</p>
<p>What is the secret behind advertising of products by various companies?</p>
<p>We know that across the world, several thousands of crores of rupees are being spent every month by various companies towards advertising their products! What makes them spend so much of money on advertising? It is nothing but implanting visualization in the minds of customers which in turn motivates the customers to buy their product. The advertising agencies study the customer base for the particular product and analyze the customers preferences, habits and mind-set. They use a suitable role model in the advertisement using the product. Most often, celebrities from the film industry, cricket etc. are used as brand ambassadors for endorsements. The designing of the advertisement is done in such a way that it creates a strong visualization of the product in the mind of the customer. These advertisements are then put on T.V channels, in newspapers, banners, wall posters etc. to reach the minds of potential customers viewing it. A kid looks at an advertisement about a bicycle on T.V. The advertisement is daily visualized in the kid's mind. The end result is obvious - his parents are forced to go to the market and bring the cycle home!</p>
<p>Hence, the basic principle involved in the advertising of products is creating a strong visualization in the minds of the prospective customers about these products.</p>
<p>Creating a shared Vision across organizations</p>
<p>Just as individuals need to visualize their goals and translate these into reality, every company (organization) should visualize what it should be. In the corporate world, this is referred to as the 'Vision, Mission & Values Statement' of the company. The Vision, Mission and Values statement of the company is widely communicated to all its employees and all efforts of the company (from the Managing Director down to the rank and file employee) are to be directed towards realizing the Vision, Mission and Values of the company.</p>
<p>The Vision, Mission and Values statements are</p>
<p>brief statements composed of the most inspiring words by the top management of the company and used as a tool to set the direction for</p>
<p>the future of the company; core values that have to be followed in achieving this goal. A shared vision is created across the organization and all employees are driven into achieving the cherished vision of the company.</p>
<p>Using these Vision- Mission statements, a company can communicate its intentions in the most powerful manner to its employees and motivate members of the team to move in the direction of achieving its vision. The Vision, Mission and Values statement of the company</p>
<p>I do not believe a man can ever leave his business. He ought to think of it by day and dream of it by night.</p>
<table>
<tr>
<td>The future belongs to those </td>
<td>Dreams are extremely important. </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>who see possibilities before </td>
<td>You can’t do it unless you can </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>they become obvious. </td>
<td>imagine it.</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>John Scully</p>
<p>Vision is the art of seeing the invisible.</p>
<p>George Lucas</p>
<p>defines its purpose and primary objectives. Let us now look at the way by which Winston Churchill used the 'shared vision' approach for his nation. During the Second World War, he was the Prime Minister as well as the Defence Minister of Britain. As the Defence Minister of Britain, Winston Churchill was well aware of his country 's weaknesses to face the German menace. But he was adept in communication skills as he was a gifted orator. He created a shared vision across the country by charging the people with thoughts of victory. This shared vision raised the morale of the armed forces and they displayed excellence at war.</p>
<p>What is the importance of using shared vision for individuals?</p>
<p>We have seen above how Vision-Mission statements are used across the organization to channelize the energies of everyone towards the cherished goal. But what does this mean to an individual? If the individual is in the field of games, sports, music, art, dance etc., then his entire career may depend upon his individual talents. But if the individual has goals that require the participation of several others in fulfilling and achieving his vision e.g. effective entrepreneurship of private or social organizations, then it becomes necessary for the individual to extend the visualization and dreams of his goals with all others whose involvement is needed and all such people also need to be charged with the idea of attaining the common goal.</p>
<p>Individuals can learn many things from Swami Vivekananda in creating a shared vision among his team members to channelize the group's energy towards the common goal.</p>
<p>With his 'man-making religion', Swami Vivekananda roused the sleeping nation. His new perspective of 'Karma Yoga' with its nucleus of 'service to humanity is service to God' created a shared vision across the world and this shared vision is still motivating several millions of persons across the globe.</p>
<p>The charisma of Swami Vivekananda lies in his ability to magnetize people with the most inspiring words and drive them into action for</p>
<p>achieving the cherished vision. Referring to the amazing abilities of Swami Vivekananda to drive people towards his cherished vision, Roma Rolland said, “I can't touch these sayings of his</p>
<p>Romain Rolland</p>
<p>…. without receiving a thrill through my body like an electric shock. And what shocks, what transports, must have been produced when in burning words they were issued from the lips of the hero.”</p>
<p>Visualization as the means to attain God in spiritual practices!</p>
<p>
<span>It is no surprise that all principles in the materialistic world are used for spiritual purposes. The only difference is the direction of the usage. Let us see now how the principle of visualization is used in the spiritual field. When a devotee is meditating on his chosen deity, he is prone to feel that God is dwelling somewhere in Heaven. The devotee may feel a huge gap due to the imagination of the distance barrier between him and God. To build intimate relationships between the devotee and God, Hindu scriptures provide a technique called 'Bhava'. We can readily see that it is similar to visualization used in the materialistic world, but used in a different </span>
<span>direction. These 'bhavas' take five different modes to suit the temperament and liking of the devotee. Swami Vivekananda described these bhavas in a touching way in his lectures given on 'Bhakti Yoga' in the Western countries. It is pertinent here to look at these bhavas to understand how visualization leads to the attainment of the cherished goal. </span>
</p>
<p>Types of 'Bhavas' (Visualizations) between devotee and God</p>
<p>The visualization of God is referred to as “ Bhava” in the Hindu scriptures. This bhava can take five different variations to suit the individual tastes, i.e. Shanta, Dasya, Sakhya, Vatsalya and Mathura.</p>
<p>i)Shanta bhava : In this the devotee is peaceful. He does not dance nor jump with high emotions. Here the devotee visualizes God's nature as the Supreme spirit and divinity. Bhishma's visualization of Lord Krishna is an example of</p>
<p>Shanta Bhava.</p>
<p>ii)Dasya Bhava : In Dasya Bhava, the devotee</p>
<p>visualizes that he is a servant of the Lord.</p>
<p><span>Hanuman's devotion to Lord Rama is the perfect example of Dasya Bhava. iii)Sakhya Bhava (Friend attitude): Here the </span>devotee visualizes God as his close friend.</p>
<p>Arjuna's devotion towards Lord Krishna is the</p>
<p>perfect example of Sakhya Bhava. Here God</p>
<p>becomes our friend - the friend who is near, the</p>
<p>friend to whom we may freely tell all the tales and</p>
<p>woes of our lives. The inner-most secrets of our</p>
<p>hearts we place before God with the greatest</p>
<p>assurance of safety and support. Here God is the</p>
<p>friend whom the devotee accepts as an equal. In</p>
<p>
<span>Sakhya Bhava, God is viewed as our playmate. iv)Vatsalya Bhava: Here the devotee visualizes God as his offspring and always thinks of Him with parental love. Kausalya's love for Lord Rama and Yashoda's love for Lord Krishna are perfect examples of Vatsalya Bhava. In Vatsalya Bhava, the devotee loves God not as a father but as his child. This may seem peculiar but it is a discipline to enable us to detach all ideas of power from the concept of God. Here the devotee does not care to conceive God as mighty, majestic and glorious. v)Madhura Bhava: In Madhura Bhava, the devotee visualizes God as his sweet-heart. It is Atma </span>
<span>Samarpana ( complete surrender of self to God). Radha's love for Krishna is an example of Madhura Bhva. However, Madhura Bhava is not recommended as a means for ordinary devotees due to the various pitfalls involved! </span>
</p>
<p>Let's do a recap!</p>
<p>We need to give strength and continuity to our thoughts by constantly dreaming of them. In visualization, one imagines that one is already in the state of achieving the goal and by floating on that energy, one draws the motivation to drive his/her actions. We can readily see that the basic principle behind the multi-billion dollar advertising industry is nothing but creating a strong visualization of the product in the minds of customers so that they are driven to purchase the advertised product. The visualization technique is used not only at the individual level but also at the organizational (company) level to realize their dreams by issuing Vision-Mission statements and thereby providing a shared vision across the organization. We can also see that the visualization technique is used even in spiritual practices as a means to attain God.</p>
<p>Chapter-4</p>
<p>How much time for visualization and how much time to make it work?</p>
<p>In the previous chapter, we saw how visualization/constant dreaming and thinking of a goal can help in translating it into a reality. Constantly dreaming of big things (visualizing it) is one form of work, and translating the dreams into action is another form of work. We need to clearly identify how much of our time resources need to be allocated for visualization and how much to the execution of the work. The relative percentage of time resources to be allocated to each of these two important activities depends on the individual's position in an organization. Now let us look at the functioning of the left and right parts of the brain. We shall also talk about the thinkers and the doers!</p>
<p>The functions of the left and right portions of the brain</p>
<p>Human brain is primarily classified into two</p>
<p>Thinking</p>
<p>LEFT BRAIN</p>
<p>RIGHT BRAIN</p>
<p>Doing</p>
<p>LEFT BRAIN</p>
<p>RIGHT BRAIN</p>
<p>portions – namely, the left side of the brain and the right side of the brain. Each of these sides do specific tasks in our day-to-day lives. Every individual has his preferred thinking style and this style labels him as a left–side brain thinker (colloquially referred to as left – brained persons) or a right–side brain thinker (colloquially referred as right – brained person ). This does not mean that one can exclusively use either the right side of the brain or the left side of the brain. However, one side of the brain dominates his/her thinking style.</p>
<p>The left side of the brain is detail-oriented, logical, practical, objective, strategy-oriented and reality-based. The right side of the brain is imagination-oriented, focused on the big picture, fantasy-based, creative and subjective in outlook Accordingly, a person who is more logical, analytical and objective in his outlook is called a 'left –brained person' while a person with more imagination, intuition, creativity and subjectivity is called a 'right – brained person'. The right-brain and left-brain theory is attributed to Roger W. Sperry who was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1981.</p>
<p>Visualization & Execution -the respective functions of the right and left portions of the brain</p>
<p>The visualization, i.e. constant dreaming/imagination of a cherished goal, referred to in the previous chapter, is essentially a function of the right brain. It is like an architect who imagines and draws up a plan. The left - brain is logic - based and is like an engineer who executes the job as per the plan prepared by the architect. To attain qualities of excellence and thereby, get wealth and success free of cost, we need to be an architect as well as an engineer.</p>
<p>Let us now move to the topic of thinkers and doers.</p>
<p>The thinkers: The right -brained persons</p>
<p>Right–brain dominant persons are very good visionaries but they do not have execution focus to translate their dreams into reality. These people can see very well into the future and articulate wonderful things. They are experts in making</p>
<p>Without initiative, leaders are simply workers in leadership positions.</p>
<p>The productivity of work is not the responsibility of the worker but of the manager.</p>
<p>Man, alone, has the power to transform his thoughts into physical reality; man, alone, can dream and make his dreams come true.</p>
<p>Napoleon Hill</p>
<p>You have to think anyway, so why not think big?</p>
<p>Donald Trump</p>
<p>power-point presentations. Their brains work much faster than their physical bodies. But when it comes to execution, they lack the managerial skills to get the work done. They have several blind-spots in inter-personal relationships and in managing the teams. Such people can shine only when they are backed by a very strong team with excellent execution skills. Otherwise, these thinkers fail in translating their dreams into reality due to lack of practical skills.</p>
<p>Let us illustrate this view point with a story!</p>
<p>There was a very strong man who could walk very fast carrying heavy loads but he was blind. So he could not utilize his strong body to cross the road bustling with heavy vehicular traffic. There was another man who had a sharp intellect and good eyesight but unfortunately he was lame and could not walk. He too could not use his intellectual abilities to cross the road in view of the heavy traffic. Then these two, who could not cross the busy road independently, came to an understanding. The blind man carried the lame person on his shoulders. The lame person gave directions to the blind man who was carrying him; as a result of this co-ordination both crossed the road safely dodging the heavy vehicular traffic.</p>
<p>If one has great visionary skills but does not have managerial skills to implement his plans, then he should have a strong team of down-to-earth practical persons for achieving his cherished goals. The above story illustrates this point in a practical way.</p>
<p>The doers: The left- brained persons</p>
<p>These left–brained persons are down-to-earth practical persons. They are workaholics and can work - day in and day out. They can manage people and events very well and have excellent interpersonal skills. These people have a dominant left brain. But the right - brain is not at par with the left part of the brain. These people do not have the visionary skills. Ask them to make a detailed plan for a new project and their work will never be done. Give them a detailed project report and ask them to execute it; they will work out miracles! These people need visionaries to guide them in their</p>
<p>You must try to combine in your life immense idealism with immense practicality.</p>
<p>work. In the absence of visionary people leading them, their workaholic abilities cannot achieve great results.</p>
<p>Thinkers and doers</p>
<p>In reality, we cannot have only thinkers or doers. Everybody is a combination of a thinker and a doer. The percentage of thinker and doer in a given person must be rightly balanced according to the nature and position of the person in an organization. There cannot be a universal formula applicable for everybody because such a universal formula will destroy everything. A person in a particular job needs a certain percentage of usage of the left and right parts of the brain; and the non-allocation of the right resources to each side of the brain will lead to his failure in that job position.</p>
<p>Let us now take a look at the top-level management, middle-level management and the work force in a company to understand this.</p>
<p>Top-level management, middle-level management and work force</p>
<p>There are no exclusive thinkers and no exclusive doers in any organization. Depending on the nature of our work and the position we hold in the organization, we are required to focus more on one aspect than on another. Let us understand this more by studying the roles of the top-level management, middle -level management and the down-the-line work force in a company.</p>
<p>a)Top-Level Management : Thinking is the primary responsibility and doing is the secondary responsibility</p>
<p>The primary responsibility of the top management is to show direction to the work force of the company. Its members should be think -tanks and great visionaries. They have to focus on creating opportunities for the growth of the company. They need to spend several hours with deep thinking and visualize benefits from future opportunities as well as gear up the present organizational set-up to face future challenges. We can understand this well by considering an organization as a bicycle. The top management represents the front wheel which shows direction to the power generated by back wheel and the work force represents the rear wheel which</p>
<p>Top management has primary responsibility of visionary work and secondary responsibility of execution of work.</p>
<p>generates the power of movement by constant pedaling ; and the bicycle, taken together with all its parts, represents the company. The job of the work force is to produce goods and its members are the doers. The job of the top management is to provide direction to the work force and its members are the thinkers.</p>
<p>But if members of the top management develop an attitude that their only job is to be visionaries and show direction to the work force and execution is none of their business, then the company is sure to fail. While providing guidance through vision is the primary responsibility of its top management, its members are also responsible for the execution of the work to translate the company's vision into a reality. The top management members should effectively discharge their secondary responsibility of execution of work by allocating sufficient time to drive their teams towards better performance.</p>
<p>From the work point of view, we see very often that the top management people work for 100+ hours in a week while the down-the-line work force has</p>
<p>Logic will get you from A to B. Imagination will take you everywhere.</p>
<p>only 48 hours of work. Thus, top management people work for longer hours than the usual work force in the company, but the nature of their work is entirely different from the work of a down-theline employee . The only issue is the right allocation of their time resources to the right brain as well as to the left, i.e. visionary work and work execution focus. They should not excessively focus their energies on execution thereby neglecting the visionary work of showing direction to the teams nor should they excessively become visionaries and theoretical/ idealistic persons with no focus on work execution. Shouldering the primary responsibility for visionary work without neglecting the secondary responsibility of focus on execution of the work is the key factor for the success of people chairing top management jobs.</p>
<p>Empirically we can say that top management people should be 70% right -brained and a 30% left -brained.</p>
<p>Clues to have an effective top management from Swami Vivekananda</p>
<p>Persons chairing positions of top management can learn many things from Swami Vivekananda. Let us look at one of the incidents from the life of Swami Vivekananda which shows the way the division of labour and delegation of work needs to be</p>
<p>Let not the barks of puppies frighten you, - no not even the thunderbolts of heaven.</p>
<p>followed by the top management people who must desist from too much involvement in the execution of the work and give importance to visionary work. In a letter written from Detroit to Mary Hale on 15th March, 1894, Swami Vivekananda</p>
<p>wrote: “ But I do not know – I have become very sad in my heart since I am here. I do not know why I am wearied of lecturing and all that nonsense. This mixing up with hundreds of human animals, male and female, has disturbed me. I will tell you what my taste. I cannot write – cannot speak- but I can think in deep, and when I am heated I can speak fire. But it should be a select few – very select few. And let them carry and sow my ideas broadcast if they will- not I. It is only just a division of labour. The same man never succeeded in thinking and in casting his thoughts all around. Such thoughts are not worth a penny.”</p>
<p>b) Middle-Level Management: Execution of work is the primary responsibility and visionary work is the secondary responsibility</p>
<p>A middle-level management job is to implement the policies and directions given by top management. The role of these persons is complementary to that of the top management people. Hence, their primary responsibility is the execution of vision/directions provided by the top management people and their secondary responsibility is the visionary role. Being in the middle–level, they need to support top</p>
<p>Middle level management has primary responsibility of execution of work and secondary responsibility of visionary work.</p>
<p>management persons in creating the vision and opportunities for the growth of the company. If middle -level management teams focus excessively on becoming visionaries (which is only their secondary responsibilities) and lose sight of focus on the execution of the work (which is their primary responsibility), there is no need to mention the fate</p>
<p>Go as far as you can see; when you get there, you'll be able to see farther.</p>
<p>J. P. Morgan</p>
<p>Follow effective action with quiet reflection. From the quiet reflection will come even more effective action.</p>
<p>Peter Drucker</p>
<p>Thinking is the hardest work there is, which is probably the reason why so few engage in it.</p>
<p>Henry Ford</p>
<p>Men are not prisoners of fate, but only prisoners of their own minds.</p>
<p>Franklin D. Roosevelt</p>
<p>of the company. The fundamental factor for the success of people in middle-level management is their focus on the execution of work and this will yield good results.</p>
<p>Middle-level management teams are pillars of the company. They tranaslate the vision foreseen by the top management persons into reality by meticulous execution of their work. They need to possess excellent inter-realtionship skills as they have to motivate the down-the-line work force to implement the work. There is a sea of difference in the relationships between the top management <–> middle-level management and that of the middle-level < –> down-the-line work force.</p>
<p>Empirically, we can say that the middle-level management should be 70% left - brained and 30% right – brained.</p>
<p>Balancing of left and right sides of the brain capacities for effective team work – Swami Vivekananda's methods</p>
<p>Swami Vivekananda wanted the use of the right combination of the left -brained and right -brained persons in his team members so that they work complementarily to one another to yield results. Accordingly, while delegating his work to his team members, he took special care to ensure that each team consisted of some people with a strong left brain and some others with a strong right brain so that in totality , the team had the strength of both the left and right brains ( i.e. thinkers and doers). Let us now look at one of the incidents from the life of Swami Vivekananda wherein he assigned a joint project to G.G. Narasimhachariyar and Alisinga and made use of the total power of the left and right brained persons.</p>
<p>U.S.A.</p>
<p>1894 Dear Alasinga, Everything will come to you if you put your</p>
<p>shoulders to the wheel. Now, go to work! G. G.'s</p>
<p>nature is of the emotional type, you have a level head; so work together; plunge in; this is only the beginning. Do not try to be a ruler. He is the best ruler who can serve well. Be true unto death. The work we want --we do not seek wealth, name or fame. . . . Be brave. . .. Be perfectly unselfish, and you will be sure to succeed. . . .</p>
<p>regards to your superiors. children must be ready to to accomplish their work.</p>
<p>patience, perseverance, and purity. Yours Vivekananda</p>
<p>c) The down-the-level work force: Execution of work is the only responsibility</p>
<p>These represent a vast majority of the people in the company. Their primary responsibility is the execution of work and their secondary responsibility is also the execution of work. Hence,</p>
<p>Workforce / employees have primary responsibility of executing the work and their secondary responsibility is also execution of work only.</p>
<p>people who work very hard become highly successful in this group get elevated to higher positions over a period of time. This segment have a very high aptitude for learning new things and constantly improve their capabilities to</p>
<p>climb higher up the ladder. Empirically we can say that these people should be 100% left - brained which may sound unfair as their right- brain capacities are not given any chance to exhibit their capabilities. But, they may find many opportunities to do this. Nowadays, many companies follow the principle of 'My opinion counts at the work place' and encourage members of the down–the-line work force to put forward their innovative ideas for the growth of the company. Such ideas are evaluated by an unbiased panel of judges, and worthy ideas are duly honoured and implemented. Swami Vivekananda's message of “Work, Work, Work. Let this be your motto!” should be the watchword for this segment of the work force.</p>
<p>Let's do a recap!</p>
<p>We have studied the characteristic thinking styles of right -brained persons and left – brained persons. Every individual has his preferred thinking style and this style labels him as a left- brained thinker or right- brained thinker. This does not mean that one can use exclusively either the right - brain or the left - brain dominates his/her thinking style. The thinkers are right-dominant brain people and doers are left– dominant brain people. There are no exclusive thinkers and no exclusive doers. Depending on the nature of our work and position we hold in the organization, we are required to focus more on one aspect of the work than on the other. Let us now proceed to the most important issue of translating vision into reality in the next chapter.</p>
<p>Chapter- 5</p>
<p>LET THE BRAIN, MUSCLES, NERVES, EVERY PART OF YOUR BODY, BE FULL OF THE GOAL</p>
<p>Trans lating dreams into a reality</p>
<p>I n chapter 3, we studied in depth about visuali zation -the constant dreaming and thinkin g of the goals which propel our action s . Visualization is similar to t h e job of an architect who makes dream giant, the engineer in us, to execute the plan. Let us again remember the success formula defined by Swami Vivekananda and the third sentence in this formula which is the highlighted topic of this chapter. “ Take up one idea. Make that one idea your life -- think of it, dream of it, live on that idea.</p>
<p>Let the brain, muscles, nerves, every part of your body, be full of that idea, and just leave every other idea alone. This is the way to success.”</p>
<p>Hence, the dreamer has to necessarily become a man of action to transform the dreams into reality; otherwise, the dreams remain as dreams forever. The engineer in the architect should take charge. The right side of the brain needs to drive the left side of the brain. Swami Vivekananda serves as a great role model in this action- oriented plan. He is not only a man of action but also adept in converting a sheep into a lioness and drives it into action. “Work, Work, Let this be your motive!” is the slogan of Swami Vivekananda and he aroused the sleeping nation with his 'Karma Yoga' principles.</p>
<p>Before plunging into the focus on execution of the work, let us take a look at some of the things that prevent us from moving forward with the work. A beginner has to overcome these hurdles. Subsequently, we can look at other details that will</p>
<p>be helpful to persons who are already men of action.</p>
<p>i)The 'status quo' attitude. ii) The attitude of running in the old grooves of habits.</p>
<p>iii) The penchant attitude. iv)The procrastination attitude. v) The educated illiterate's attitude. Let us now analyze these attitudes which prevent</p>
<p>people from working!</p>
<p>i)The 'status quo' attitude</p>
<p>Everybody has certain habits formed in him and these are steering his life-style. If excellence is to be achieved, another set of habits -which may be exactly opposite to the present one -needs to replace these old habits. This implies incessant physical as well as mental hard work. Many people will be easily convinced to change their lives by changing their thoughts. But while implementing and translating these thoughts into the action, many will back out saying, “ This is not our cup of tea”. Old habits are too hard to be replaced by new ones. They do not want to take the trouble but prefer to maintain the 'status quo'. If one wants to attain excellence, one must shed this trait of being content with the 'status quo'.</p>
<p>Swami Vivekananda's advice to 'status quo' people</p>
<p>The 'status quo' people have imprisoned themselves in many limitations. This inspiring message of Swami Vivekananda will do a world of good to such people who withdraw into their little shell and maintain their</p>
<p>status quo. Delivering a lecture on 'one existence appearing as many' in New York (1896), Swami Vivekananda said: “You are the creator of the universe. Like the silkworm you have built a cocoon around yourself. Who will save you? Burst your own cocoon and come out as the beautiful butterfly, as the free soul. Then alone you will see Truth. Ever tell yourself, 'I am He (God)'. These are the words that will burn up the dross that is in the mind, words that will bring out the tremendous energy which is within you already, the infinite power which is sleeping in your heart.”</p>
<p>The 'status quo' man who refused to get released from jail</p>
<p>There was a prisoner who was jailed for a very long term and this man was made to live in the dark</p>
<p>Stand up and fight. Not one step back, that is the idea. Fight it out whatever comes.</p>
<p>Iron rusts from disuse; water loses its purity from stagnation... even so does inaction sap the vigor of the mind.</p>
<p>Leonardo da Vinci</p>
<p>Great thoughts speak only to the thoughtful mind, but great actions speak to all mankind.</p>
<p>Theodore Roosevelt</p>
<p>Choose a job you love, and you will never have to work a day in your life.</p>
<p>Confucius</p>
<p>It is not because things are difficult that we do not dare; it is because we do not dare that they are difficult. -</p>
<p>Lucius Annaeus Seneca</p>
<p>room of a jail for several decades. After completing his sentence in jail, he was released. The jail wardens thought he would happily leave the jail and start living a decent life. But as this man came out of the jail's main gate, he felt very uncomfortable to face the broad daylight. He immediately requested the jail authorities to take him back into the jail and help him by putting him back into the dark room, away from the brightness of the day light. Many people unknowingly follow the same principle of this man and refuse to face the challenges of life to attain excellence.</p>
<p>ii) Running in the old grooves of habits</p>
<p>The journey of excellence is like mountaineering. One has to face several problems. One major hurdle in the journey to excellence is falling back into the old grooves of habits. Let us look at a story that has often been narrated by Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa to highlight the influence of habits on our lives.</p>
<p>The fisherwoman who could not sleep amidst the smell of flowers</p>
<p>There were two women who were close friends. One was a fisherwoman trading in fish and the other sold flowers. One day, the fisherwoman got delayed till late in the night and she preferred to stay in her flower-seller friend's house as it was nearby.</p>
<p>She came there with her empty basket after selling the fish in the market and was invited to sleep in the room where the flowers were stored. But she could not get sleep for a long time because of the fragrance of the flowers. Her hostess saw her sleepless condition and said, “Hello! Why are you tossing from side to side restlessly?” The fisherwoman replied, “I don't know, dear friend. Perhaps the fragrance of the flowers has been disturbing my sleep. Can you give the fish basket to me? Perhaps that will put me to sleep.” The basket was brought to her. She sprinkled water on it to make the smell of the fish emanate from the basket and put it near her nose. She fell into a sound sleep and snored all through the night inhaling the smell of the fish basket!</p>
<p>iii) The penchant attitude</p>
<p>These people have great ideas and dream of them very well. But they neither leave them nor follow them. They always proclaim their ideas to everyone and try to get recognition from others for their plans. When it comes to implementation, they balk at it. These people need managerial skills and improvement in their inter-relationship skills to deal with different kinds of people and complicated situations to taste success.</p>
<p>Swami Vivekananda's advice to penchant people</p>
<p>Swami Vivekananda's inspiring message can do a world of good to these 'show-off' people. He advises them thus: “Let us be true. Nine-tenths of our life's energy is spent in trying to make people think us that which we are not. That energy would be more rightly spent in becoming that which we would like to be<SPAN class="en">.</span><SPAN class="en">” </span></p>
<p>Now let us look at one incident from the life of Swami Vivekananda which drives his brother-disciples from the penchant mode into the rigorous action mode:</p>
<p>a)Let those who have come for child's play be off now</p>
<p>In a letter written from U.S.A., Swami</p>
<p>Vivekananda drove his brother -disciples into action mode with these words: “It won't do merely to call Sri Ramakrishna an Incarnation, you must manifest power. Where are Gour-ma, Yogin-ma, and Golap -ma? Tell them to spread these ideas. We want thousands of men and thousands of women who will spread like wildfire from the Himalayas to Cape Comorin, from the North Pole to the South Pole -- all over the world. It is no use indulging in child's play --neither is there time for it. Let those who have come for child's play be off now, while there is time, or they will surely come to grief. We want an organisation. Off with laziness. Spread!</p>
<p>Spread! Run like fire to all places. Do not depend upon me. Whether I live or die, go on spreading, yourselves.”</p>
<p>b) Do not talk; work, work, work!</p>
<p>While driving Narasimhachariyar, his disciple, into the action mode , Swami Vivekananda wrote</p>
<p>'Now, do not talk; work, work, work! I do not see anything permanent you have done in India -- I do not see any centre you have made --I do not see any temple or hall you have erected --I do not see anybody joining hands with you. There is too much talk, talk, talk! We are great, we are great! Nonsense! We are imbeciles; that is what we are! This hankering after name and fame and all other humbugs --what are they to me? What do I</p>
<p>care about them? I should like to see hundreds coming to the Lord! Where are they? I want them, I want to see them. You must seek them out. Plunge into the fire and bring the people towards the Lord. That you may catch my fire, that you may be intensely sincere, that you may die the heroes' death on the field of battle --is the constant prayer of -Vivekananda”</p>
<p>iv) The procrastination attitude</p>
<p>People with procrastination attitude are experts in delaying things. If we enquire about the progress, they have many ready-made answers like, “I am analyzing things.”; “Give me some time to think about it.”; “Conditions</p>
<p>are not favourable at this juncture.” There is no end to their professionally-structured answers and well-rehearsed excuses. The fundamental reason behind procrastination is the gap between the abilities required and the abilities they have. Instead of filling up the gap through guidance from experts, they develop the fear of failure. Their daily schedule is full of the least important things. The only thing they need to do is replace this daily unimportant agenda with high priority work and dare to attempt to do this work by taking guidance from experts, wherever required.</p>
<p>Swami Vivekananda's advice to procrastinating people</p>
<p>Swami Vivekananda's advice to procrastinating type people is, “Set yourselves to work -- to work! Do not tarry -- the time of death is approaching day by day! Do not sit idle, thinking that everything will be done in time, later on! Mind -- nothing will</p>
<p>be done that way!” While giving lectures on Karma Yoga in Western countries, quoting one of the incidents from his life, Swami Vivekananda said: “I once met a man in my country whom I had known before as a very stupid, dull person, who knew nothing and had not</p>
<p>the desire to know anything, and was living the life of a brute. He asked me what he should do to know God, how he was to get free. 'Can you tell a lie?' I asked him. 'No,' he replied. 'Then you must learn to do so. It is better to tell a lie than to be a brute, or a log</p>
<p>of wood. You are inactive; you have not certainly reached the highest state, which is beyond all actions, calm and serene; you are too dull even to do something wicked.' That was an extreme case, of course, and I was joking with him; but what I meant was that a man must be active in order to pass through activity to perfect calmness.”</p>
<p>Let us now look at a few incidents from the life of Swami Vivekananda to understand how he drove one of his brother disciples to shift gear from the procrastinating mode to the intensive action mode.</p>
<p>Six long months of brooding over the questions of honour and disgrace, gain and loss pertaining to this?</p>
<p>Let us look at another letter written by Swami Vivekananda wherein he wrote to his brother -disciple Swami Brahmananda - pushing him into action, ' Should one spend six long months brooding over the questions of honour and disgrace, gain and loss pertaining to this? . . . I am a man of action. Simply advice upon advice is being given -- this one says this, that one says that; again that man threatens, and this one frightens! This life is not, in my view, such a sweet thing that I would long to live through so much care and caution and fear.'</p>
<p>v)The educated illiterate's attitude</p>
<p><span>There are some illiterate people who cannot read and they may not be able to progress on the journey of attaining excellence in the material world. But there are those who have read several books and became repositories of knowledge. They, however, do not use their knowledge to practical ends. What </span>is the difference between a person who cannot read and a person who can read but never uses it for practical purposes? The purpose of acquiring knowledge is to use it for the benefit of the individual as well as to the society.</p>
<p>A doctor, an engineer, a marketing person, a chartered accountant, an industrialist or any other professional spends several years at colleges, institutions and universities to learn their respective subjects. Over a period of decades in his chosen profession, a person learns many things and by the time he attains 50+ years of age, he becomes a repository of knowledge. But what is the use of knowledge and experience when they are not used for practical purposes for the benefit of society? A DVD disc costs Rs12/- and can hold</p>
<p>4.7 G.B data, i.e. information equal to the data contained in a library. If person has vast knowledge but does not use it, the value of his whole knowledge is just Rs12/-(cost of DVD) because his brain is simply acting like a storage device to hold all the information.</p>
<p>Swami Vivekananda says, “ The training by which the current and expression of will are brought under control and become fruitful is called education….Education is not the amount of information that is put into your brain and runs riot there, undigested all your life. We must have life-building, man-making, character-making assimilation of ideas. If you have assimilated five ideas and made them your life and character, you have more education than any man who has got by heart a whole library.”</p>
<p>There are many knowledgeable people who take the back-seat once they retire under the garb of senior citizens, and many of them prefer a peaceful life full of rest. But life should start after retirement as he has discharged all responsibilities and can take courageous decisions without playing a safe, conservative role. He has rich experience and knowledge, and this should be put to the right use for the benefit of society. All of us are aware of One Day International (ODI) cricket matches. In the initial 35 overs, the players bat cautiously to retain the wickets and try to get as many runs as possible and in the last 15 overs, they slam sixers and boundaries as saving wickets serves no purpose and adding runs is the need of the hour. The elderly people should follow the policy of the last overs strategy of ODI's'. As their lives are nearing the end, they should use their knowledge for the welfare of society which they could not do in the early period of their lives due to personal constraints.</p>
<p>Swami Vivekananda's advice to educated illiterates</p>
<p>Swami Vivekananda's inspiring message to these people is: “You have to be practical in all spheres of work. The whole country has been ruined by masses of theories…. If you have assimilated five ideas and made them your life and character, you have more education than any man who has got by heart a whole library.”</p>
<p>Let us look at a few incidents from the life of Swami Vivekananda which inspire us to take up Herculean tasks.</p>
<p>a) If one has got power, one must show it in action</p>
<p>Let us see how Swami Vivekananda inspires educated and knowledgeable persons to translate their knowledge into action. In one of his letters, Swami Vivekananda wrote to Swami Brahmananda: “Well, I cannot tell you all -- if I could but get another demon like me! The Lord will supply me everything in time. . . . If one has got power, one must manifest it in action. . . .Off with your ideas of Mukti and Bhakti! There is only one way in the world, 'The good live for others alone', 'The wise man should sacrifice himself for others'. I can secure my own good only by doing you good. There is no other way, none whatsoever. . . . You are God, I am God, and man is God. It is this God manifested through humanity who is doing everything in this world. Is there a different God sitting high up somewhere? To work, therefore!”</p>
<p>b)Useless bandying of words and making noise is taking away our time; it is consuming our life energy</p>
<p>Swami Vivekananda wrote to his brother, disciple Swami Akhandananda : “ What fear! Opportunity, remedy, and its application will present themselves. I do not care about the result, well or ill. I shall be happy if only you do this much of work. Wordy warfares, texts and scriptures, doctrines and dogmas -- all these I am coming to loathe as poison in this my advanced age. Know this for certain that</p>
<p>Take the whole responsibility on your shoulders, and know thatyou are the creator of your own destiny. All the strength andsuccor you want is within yourself.</p>
<p>Risk is a part of God’s game, alike for men and nations.</p>
<p>Warren Buffet</p>
<p>Act as if what you do makes a difference. It does.</p>
<p>William James</p>
<p>Satisfaction lies in the effort, not in the attainment, full effort is full victory.</p>
<p>Never start with diffidence, Always start with confidence.</p>
<p>J.R.D. Tata</p>
<p>he who will work will be the crown on my head. Useless bandying of words and making noise is taking away our time, is consuming our life-energy, without pushing the cause of humanitarianism a step further. -- away with fear! Bravo! There is a hero indeed! May the blessed Guru be enthroned in your heart, and the Divine Mother guide your hands.”</p>
<p>Let us now turn our attention to positive habits that make us a man of action</p>
<p>In the above paragraphs, we took a peep at some negative qualities that hinder our progress on the journey of excellence and learnt how to counteract them. We now turn our attention to positive ways of focusing on work.</p>
<p>i) Bubbling with energy and enthusiasm! ii) Seeing opportunities in problems! iii) Stand up and fight; Not take one step back! iv) Do work as worship. v) Have faith in yourselves first and then in God. Let us now analyze each positive way to work! i)Bubbling with energy and enthusiasm! One of the fundamental quality of a man of</p>
<p>action is to be bubbling with energy and enthusiasm. Everybody likes such a person. These persons can achieve great things in their lives. Give</p>
<p>some additional work to a man bubbling with energy and enthusiasm who is already burdened with one hundred other works, he will do it immediately. Give the same work to a lazy man who has no work -he will never do it.</p>
<p>Sri Ramakrishna Paramahansa used to cite an example of active persons. In the villages, the farmers go to the market/fair on Sundays to buy things. Those who want to sell their bulls line them up in the mela (market/ fair). No farmer can afford to buy an inert bull and once a bull is purchased, it cannot be returned or exchanged. So the farmers conduct some litmus tests to determine whether a bull is active or not. They twist the tail of the sitting bull and it immediately gets up and stands erect if it is active in nature. An inactive bull never reacts when its tail is twisted and comfortably sits in its position with the appearance of unconcern. No farmer can afford to buy such a bull as he can never manage to get his work done by it.</p>
<p>Referring to the active nature of Swami Vivekananda, his guru -Sri Ramakrishna -commented, “Narendra is not under the control of anything. He is like the male pigeon. If you hold a male pigeon by its beak, it breaks away from you; but a female pigeon keeps still. I feel a great strength when Narendra is with me in a gathering.”</p>
<p>Heroism is soul in action!</p>
<p>Swami Vivekananda said heroism is the soul of action. He wanted to see the Ultimate Truth in all its terrible nakedness. He said the vilest crime is to sit idle and not doing anything. He asserted, “The older I grow, the more everything seems to me lie in manliness. This is my new Gospel. Do even evil like a man! Be wicked, if you must, on a grand scale!” Once Sister Nivedita (a disciple whom Swami Vivekananda treated as his daughter -disciple ) had complimented India on the insignificant rate of crime; on that occasion, Swami Vivekananda replied in sorrowful protest, “ Would to God it were otherwise, in my land! For this is verily the virtuousness of death.”</p>
<p>ii) Seeing opportunities in problems!</p>
<p>Work-oriented persons see opportunities in problems, while those who want to avoid work see problems in all opportunities. A person who constantly dreams of his objectives will always grab all opportunities that come his way and never see problems that are interlaced with it. Referring to the abilities of Americans to seize opportunities for growth, Swami Vivekananda wrote to Manmatha Nath Bhattacharya in a letter: “The men here are very clever in earning wealth. Where others do not see even dust, there they see gold.”</p>
<p>Develop the attitude of people working in gold and diamond mines</p>
<p>While digging in the gold mines to unearth one</p>
<p>ounce of gold, tons of dirt has to be removed from the ore. The people involved in mining operations to extract gold do not notice the dirt at all and</p>
<p>their minds see only gold. Similarly, a person who wants to achieve his goals should look at the various opportunities available and not the problems associated with the goals. There cannot be any opportunities without any problems. The proverb says, 'No risks- No gain.'</p>
<p>Similarly in diamond mines, to extract a small</p>
<p>piece of diamond, the miners have to remove tons of dirt. Their minds do not see the dirt while digging and they only look out for</p>
<p>diamonds. Hence, a person who dreamt of an idea constantly and wants to achieve it will always see only the opportunities available in different situations, and his mind never bothers about a few hardships that are to be encountered while encashing those opportunities. He is a staunch believer of the proverb 'No pains- No gains.'</p>
<p>The story of a fascinated man, Vilvamangla</p>
<p><span>During his discourses in Western countries, Swami Vivekananda narrated a story from 'Bhaktamala' which highlights how a man driven by his desires moves forward. Let us look at it in the words of Swami Vivekananda: “There was a young man, a Brahmin by birth, in a certain village. The man fell in love with a bad woman in another village. There was a big river between the two villages, and this man, every day, used to go to that girl, crossing this river in a ferry boat. Now, one day he had to perform the obsequies of his father, and so, although he was longing, almost dying to go to the girl, he could not. The ceremonies had to be performed, and all those things had to be undergone; it is absolutely necessary in Hindu society. He was fretting and fuming and all that, but could not help it. At last the ceremony ended, and night came, and with the night, a tremendous howling storm arose. The rain was pouring down, and the river was lashed into gigantic waves. It was very dangerous to cross. Yet he went to the bank of the river. There was no ferry boat. The ferrymen were afraid to cross, but he would go; his heart was becoming mad with love for the girl, so he would go. There was a log floating down, and he got that, and with the help of it, crossed the river, and getting to the other side dragged the log up, threw it on the bank, and went to the house. The doors were closed. He knocked at the door, but the wind was howling, and nobody heard him. So he went round the walls and at last found what he thought to be a rope, hanging from the wall. He clutched at it, saying to himself, 'Oh, my love has left a rope for </span>me to climb.' By the help of that rope he climbed over the wall, got to the other side, missed his footing, and fell, and the noise aroused the inmates of the house, and the girl came out and found the man there in a faint. She revived him, and noticing that he was smelling very unpleasantly, she said, 'What is the matter with you? Why this stench on your body? How did you come into the house? How did you cross the river?' 'Why, I got hold of a log of wood.' 'Let us go and see,' said the girl. The rope was a cobra, a tremendously poisonous serpent, whose least touch is death. It had its head in a hole, and was getting in when the man caught hold of its tail, and he thought it was a rope. The madness of love made him do it. When the serpent has its head in its hole, and its body out, and you catch hold of it, it will not let its head come out; so the man climbed up by it, but the force of the pull killed the serpent. 'Where did you get the log?' 'It was floating down the river.' It was a festering dead body; the stream had washed it down and that he took for a log, which explained why he had such an unpleasant odour. ”</p>
<p>iii) Stand up and fight; Not take one step back!</p>
<p>A new venture or a dream work is always fascinating and everybody can make a beginning very easily. But if we expect that achieving our cherished goal is a path of roses and all incidents will be sweet and nice, we are gravely mistaken. In this context we need to remember the words of Swami Vivekananda: “If there is a way to Heaven, it must be passing through Hell.” Hence, we have to necessarily pass through Hell to achieve our cherished goals. It is natural for many people to give up the goal when they face serious difficulties. But a man who has got the raging inner fire to achieve the goal will never give up.</p>
<p>Swami Vivekananda's inspiring message a)Fight it out whatever comes</p>
<p>While delivering a lecture on Bhagawad Gita, Swami Vivekananda said, “ Knowing this, stand up and fight! Not one step back, that is the idea. ...Fight it out, whatever comes. Let the stars move from the sphere! Let the</p>
<p>whole world stand against us! Death means</p>
<p>only a change of garment. What of it? Thus fight! You gain nothing by becoming cowards. ...Taking a step backward, you do not avoid any misfortune. You have cried to all the</p>
<p>When you work, work as if everything depends on you. When you pray, pray as if everything depends on God.</p>
<p>J.R.D. Tata</p>
<p>Plans are only good intentions unless they immediately degenerate into hard work.</p>
<p>Peter Drucker</p>
<p>A dream doesn't become reality through magic; it takes sweat, determination and hard work</p>
<p>Colin Powell</p>
<p>Progress is often equal to the difference between mind and mindset.</p>
<p>Narayana Murthy</p>
<p>Gods in the world. Has misery ceased? The masses in India cry to sixty million gods, and still die like dogs.”</p>
<p>b) A true spirit of fighting out all the odds in life</p>
<p>We can get inkling on how to fight out all the troubles in life by looking at one of the letters written by Swami Vivekananda to his brother disciple Swami Bhrahmananda, “But I have all along been like a hero -- I want my work to be quick like lightning, and firm as adamant. Likewise shall I die also. Therefore kindly do my work for me -- no question of success or defeat enters here at all. I have never retreated in a fight -- shall I now . . . ? There is success and failure in every work. But I am inclined to believe that one who is a coward will be born after death as an insect or a worm, that there is no salvation for a coward even after millions of years of penance. Well, shall I after all be born as a worm? . . . In my eyes this world is mere play -- and it will always remain as such… So loss of money, or loss of anything else -- I cannot bother about, and I will not. When I fight, I fight with girded loins -- that much I fully understand; and I also understand that man, that hero, that god, who says, 'Don't care, be fearless. O brave one, here I am by your side!' To such a man -god I offer a million salutations. ”</p>
<p>Men of action! Alexander – Stand up and fight; Not take one step back</p>
<p>If we study the lives of the world's renowned people, we can readily see the fundamental factor behind their success is their inherent quality of standing up and fighting all the issues that crop up in their way and never step back. Let us look at the qualities of Alexander of Macedonia even though 'stand up and fight' is not merely for fighting battles but is more related to facing stumbling blocks in the path of achieving our goal. The strategies of Alexander and his leadership style is today widely applied by management experts to develop strategies in the battlefield of the market place for the expansion and growth of their companies.</p>
<p>Alexander (356 B.C) earned the title of 'Alexander the Great' by virtue of his heroic qualities. The most important factor behind his success is the person who taught him basic principles. Alexander quotes, “I am indebted to my father for living, but to my teacher for living well.” Look at the lineage of knowledge flow to Alexander. The great philosopher Socrates taught his dearest disciple Plato. The flow of knowledge passed from Plato to his pupil, Aristotle. When he, Alexander, was 13</p>
<p>Take courage and work on. Patience and steady work- this is the only way. Go on; remember- patience and purity and courage and steady work.</p>
<p>years old, his father Philip availed himself of the services of Aristotle to sharpen the intellectual faculties of Alexander. Aristotle gave Alexander an extensive three years training in rhetoric and literature, and stimulated</p>
<p>his interest in science, medicine, and philosophy - all of which became of importance in his later life. Over-powered by egoism due to his successes, Alexander sometimes deviated from the principles taught by his guru but he always carried the written teachings of Aristotle with him and referred to them frequently. He applied the principles taught by Aristotle widely in his strategies, and his steadfast following of those principles brought him success and glory.</p>
<p>The success story of Alexander the Great</p>
<p>At the age of 16, Alexander was given the power to rule by his father and he proved his capability by swiftly defeating the Thracian tribe of Maedi and renaming their stronghold as Alexandripolis. At the age of 20, Alexander lost his father and taking this opportunity, the earlier conquered rulers -the Illyrians, Thracians and Greeks -rebelled to gain back their independence. But Alexander acted with amazing speed. The courageous Alexander, with his intellectual abilities sharpened by Aristotle, was more than capable to regain control of his kingdom.</p>
<p>After bringing the territories back to Macedonian control, the 22 year old Alexander plunged into his next move of invading Asia. He encountered King Darius III of Persia at river Granicus. Alexander won the battle and marched forward into Asia Minor conquering the coast of Asia Minor (a peninsula of Western Asia between the Black Sea and the Mediterranean Sea) and then successfully captured central Asia Minor.</p>
<p>When Alexander reached 23 years of age (333 BC), he encountered the Persian forces under the command of King Darius III at a mountain pass at Issus, in north-western Syria. Alexander's soldiers were far less in number as compared to that of Darius's army. But Alexander put up a brave face and raised the morale of his army. He lead the army by positioning himself in the front and guided his army to victory. King Darius fled in panic before the Macedonian phalanx, abandoning his mother, wife, two teenage daughters and a young son. Alexander treated them with the respect out of consideration for their royalty and never took any advantage of their captivity. He applied the principles taught by his teacher Aristotle in this case wisely and reaped rich dividends. While he honoured and respected the mother and wife of Darius, he also later married a daughter of King Darius as a symbol of unity between the long warring nations of Greece and Persia.</p>
<p>At the age of 25 years, Alexander marched into Egypt. The Persian army surrendered and the Macedonians were welcomed by the Egyptians as liberators for they had despised living under Persian rule for almost two centuries.</p>
<p>Alexander enlarged his army with additional soldiers from Europe and headed towards Babylon and on the way conquered lands between the Tigris and the Euphrates and finally reached the plains of Gaugamela in Iraq. The Macedonian army sought the permission of Alexander to attack the Persian camps by taking advantage of darkness at night. But Alexander set aside their proposal as he wanted to defeat Darius in a manly way so that he would not dare to rise against him again. Accordingly, both armies encountered each other the next day in the morning. Alexander's cavalry directly attacked King Darius and he fled once again as he had done at Issus. Alexander captured Babylon.</p>
<p>At the age of 29 years, Alexander marched into India by invading Punjab and attacking King Porus who was one of the most powerful rulers of India. It was not an easy task for Alexander to face the thunderstorm of the army of King Porus who were armed with elephants and used methods of warfare unknown to Alexander's army. But the Indians were defeated in the ensuing battle.</p>
<p>One soul manifesting itself as Alexander, Genghis Khan and Napoleon in three different conquests!</p>
<p>We can see from the life of Alexander that he had a great passion to conquer the world. He constantly dreamt of it and that tremendous passion drove him to incessant action. When a passionate soul fails in achieving its goal in one life, its tendencies/qualities are taken forward in the form of a causal body from birth to birth and will once again strive to achieve its goal in the next birth. Alexander (356 B.C – 323 B.C) made incessant efforts to conquer the whole world and failed; Genghis Khan (1162-1227 A.D) made incessant efforts to conquer the world and failed; Napoleon (1769-1821 A.D) made incessant efforts to conquer the world and failed.</p>
<p>Once Swami Vivekananda was talking about Genghis Khan, the conqueror from Central Asia</p>
<p>Alexnader Genghis Khan Napoleon (356 - 323 B.C) (1162-1227 A.D) (1769-1821 A.D)</p>
<p>and said, “You hear people talk of him as a vulgar aggressor- he cried passionately, but that is not true! They are never greedy or vulgar, these great souls! He was inspired with the thought of unity, and he wanted to unify his world. Yes, Napoleon was cast in the same mould. And another, Alexander. Only those three, or perhaps one soul manifesting itself in three different conquests!" Then he went on to speak of that one soul whom he believed had come again and again in religion, charged with the divine impulse to bring about the unity of man in God.</p>
<p>iv) Do work as worship</p>
<p>The famous proverb says, “Work is worship.” Swami Vivekananda says, “Let the end and the means be joined into one." When you are doing any work, do not think of anything beyond it. Do it as worship, as the highest mode of worship, and devote your whole life to it for the time being. …</p>
<p>Whenever failure comes, if we analyze it critically, in ninety-nine per cent of the cases we shall find that it was because we did not pay attention to the means of achieving the end goal. Proper attention to the finishing (strengthening) of the means is what we need. With the right means, the end must come. We forget that it is the cause that produces the effect; the effect cannot come by itself; unless the causes are exact, proper and powerful, the effect will not be produced. Once the ideal is chosen and the means determined, we may almost let go off the ideal because we are sure it will be there when the means are perfected. When the cause is there, there is no more difficulty about the effect as the effect is bound to come. If we take care of the cause, the effect will take care of itself. The realization of the ideal is the effect. The means are the cause: attention to the means, therefore, is the great secret of life.”</p>
<p>a) The story of Dharma Vyadha</p>
<p>Swami Vivekananda explains the story of Dharma Vyadha, emphasizing how he did his duty with cheerfulness and whole–heartedness, and became illumined. Hence, the right performance of the duties of any station in life, without anticipating results, leads us to excellence. Let us look at the story as described by swami Vivekananda.</p>
<p>A young Sannyasin seeking divine knowledge was advised by a pious woman to meet Dharma Vyadha who was a butcher and made his living by selling meat. The Sannyasin went to meet Dharma Vyadha, and at that time, he was slicing meat with his knives, talking to and bargaining with different people. The Sannyasin said to himself, 'Lord help me! Is this the man from whom I am going to learn? He is the incarnation of a demon, if he is anything." In the meantime Dharma Vyadha looked up and said, "O Sannyasin! Did that lady send you here? Take a seat until I have done my business." The Sannyasin thought, "What comes to me here?" He took his seat; the man went on with his work, and after he had finished his work, he took his money and said to the Sannyasin, "Come sir, come to my home." On reaching home the Vyadha gave him a seat, saying, "Wait here," and went into the house. He then washed the feet of his elderly father and mother, fed them, and did all he could to please them, after which he came to the Sannyasin and said, "Now, sir, you have come here <span>to see me; what can I do for you?" The Sannyasin asked him a few questions about soul and about God, and Dharma Vyadha gave him a lecture which forms a part of the 'Mahabharata', called the 'Vyadha-Gita'. It contains one of the highest flights of the Vedanta. When the Vyadha finished his teaching, the Sannyasin felt astonished. He said, "Why are you in that body? With such knowledge as yours why are you in a Vyadha's body, and doing such filthy, ugly work?" "My son," replied Dharma Vyadha, "no duty is ugly, no duty is impure. My birth placed me in these circumstances and environments. In my boyhood I learnt the trade; I am unattached, and I try to do my duty well. I try to do my duty as a householder, and I try to do all I can to make my father and mother happy. I neither know your Yoga, nor have I become a Sannyasin, nor did I go out of the world into a forest; nevertheless, all that you have heard and seen has come to me through the unattached doing of the duty which belongs to my position." </span></p>
<p>b) I am poor and I love poor people</p>
<p><span>Achieving our goal depends on our commitment towards it and doing it as a worship. We can get clear insights into this aspect from a letter written by Swami Vivekananda to one of his disciples in Madras: “ I always pray for you: you must pray for me. Let each one of us pray day and night for the down-trodden millions in India who are held fast by poverty, priestcraft, and tyranny -- pray day and night for them. I care more to preach religion to them than to the high and the rich. I am no metaphysician, no philosopher, nay, no saint. But I am poor, I love the poor. I see what they call the poor of this country, and how many there are who feel for them! What an immense difference in India! Who feels there for the two hundred millions of men and women sunken forever in poverty and ignorance? Where is the way out? Who feels for them? They cannot find light or education. Who will bring the light to them -- who will travel from door to door bringing education to them? Let these people be your God --think of them, work for them, pray for them incessantly --the Lord will show you the way. Him I call a Mahatman (great soul) whose heart bleeds for the poor, otherwise he is a Duratman (wicked soul). Let us unite our wills in continued prayer for their good. We may die unknown, unpitied, unbewailed, without accomplishing anything -- but not one thought will be lost. It will take effect, sooner or later. My heart is too full to express my feeling; you know it, you can imagine it. So long as the millions live in hunger and ignorance, I hold every man a traitor who, </span>having been educated at their expense, pays not the least heed to them! I call those men who strut about in their finery, having got all their money by grinding the poor, wretches, so long as they do not do anything for those two hundred millions who are now no better than hungry savages! We are poor, my brothers, we are nobodies, but such have been always the instruments of the Most High. The Lord bless you all.”</p>
<p>v) Have faith in yourselves first and then in God</p>
<p>It is very good to have faith in God. But Swami Vivekananda has said that we should have faith in ourselves first and then in God. He advocated that faith in oneself is far more important than faith in God and a man of faith can achieve anything and everything. Swami Vivekananda asserted that the history of the world is the history of a few men who had faith in themselves.</p>
<p>His bold message of faith in oneself is, “Let people say whatever they like, stick to your own convictions, and rest assured, the world will be at your feet. They say, ‘Have faith in this fellow or that fellow’, but I say, ‘Have faith in yourself first’, that's the way. Have faith in yourself — all power is in you</p>
<p>— be conscious and bring it out. Say, ‘I can do everything.’ Even the poison of a snake is powerless if you can firmly deny it.”</p>
<p>Swami Vivekananda: Faith, sympathy -- fiery faith and fiery sympathy!</p>
<p>We can get insights into the importance of faith in oneself from reading one of the letters written by Swami Vivekananda to one of his disciples in Madras: “I may die here unsuccessful, another will take up the task. You know the disease, you know the remedy, only have faith. Do not look up to the so-called rich and great; do not care for the heartless intellectual writers and their cold-blooded newspaper articles. Faith, sympathy --fiery faith and fiery sympathy! Life is nothing, death is nothing, hunger nothing, cold nothing. Glory unto the Lord -- march on, the Lord is our General. Do not look back to see who falls -- forward -- onward! Thus and thus we shall go on, brethren. One falls, and another takes up the work.”</p>
<p>Let’s do a recap!</p>
<p>In this chapter we have seen translation of visions/dreams into a reality. We have seen five negative qualities that prevent us from achieving our goals -viz. maintaining the ‘status quo’, running in the grooves of old habits, penchant attitude, procrastination and educated illiterate attitude. We have also seen five positive qualities that help us achieve the goals - viz. bubbling with energy and enthusiasm, seeing opportunities in problems, standing up and fighting without stepping back, having faith in oneself first and then faith in God.</p>
<p>Chapter- 6</p>
<p>SHARE YOUR WEALTH WITH THE NEEDY AND COMPLETE THE CYCLE</p>
<p>In the previous chapters we saw that we get whatever we want from the infinite pure consciousness which is formless and beyond attributes. We saw the way to success as defined by Swami Vivekananda: “ Take up one idea. Make that one idea your life -- think of it, dream of it, live on that idea. Let the brain, muscles, nerves, every part of your body, be full of that idea, and just leave every other idea alone. This is the way to success.” We attain the qualities of excellence by this method. It is needless to point out that sharing the wealth with the needy is expected of a man of character with qualities of excellence.</p>
<p>Thank you God for all the help given to me!</p>
<p>Do we ever forget to say, “Thank you!” to the people from whom we receive help? We are taught from childhood to say, “Thank you!” for even the most trivial help we receive. How can we forget to say “Thank you!” to the infinite pure consciousness which is the fundamental factor behind our achievements? We achieved what we want by drawing energy from the formless pure consciousness by engraving our desires on it. It is essential that we should express our gratitude to the pure consciousness and offer back a portion of our wealth to needy people who are constantly praying to the infinite conscious for getting their needs fulfilled.</p>
<p>We learnt that when we pray to pure consciousness for a particular achievement, it sends us various opportunities by saying, “Tathasthu – May it be so!” Persons who bring such opportunities to us are instruments in the hands of pure consciousness, whether consciously or unconsciously. But when such a thing is done consciously with gratitude, its effects bear fruits multiplied many times. Hence, having attained everything that we want by drawing energy from pure consciousness, it is our moral obligation to act as an instrument in its hands and provide</p>
<p>Only a life lived for others is a life worthwhile.</p>
<p>Someone's sitting in the shade today because someone planted a tree a long time ago.</p>
<p>Warren Buffett</p>
<p>Man becomes great exactly in the degree in which he works for the welfare of his fellowmen.</p>
<p>If a free society cannot help the many who are poor, it cannot save the few who are rich.</p>
<p>opportunities to others who are constantly seeking help from pure consciousness.</p>
<p>Cycles of nature</p>
<p>As Albert Einstein says, “Energy can neither be created nor destroyed, it can only be changed from one form to another.” The law of conservation of energy states that the total amount of energy in an isolated system remains constant over time. Nature follows the principles of recycling and conserves energy.</p>
<p>All of us know how the water cycle ensures continuity of water. A large amount of water evaporates from the surface of oceans, rivers and lakes every day and rises into the atmosphere. The</p>
<p>If money help a man to do good to others, it is of some value; but if not, it is simply a mass of evil, and the sooner it is got rid of, the better.</p>
<p>vapour floats into the air and forms clouds and fog. When atmospheric conditions are right, the clouds release water in the form of rain. The rain water falls on the ground and into water bodies. Groundwater emerges from springs which once again enter rivers and finds its way back to the ocean, completing the water-cycle.</p>
<p>Similarly, we have the carbon cycle, energy cycle and so on and so forth. We can also look into the aspect of birth and death. At the time of birth, our physical body is formed from five elements called Earth, Water, Fire, Air and Ether which are called pancha mahabhutas (five basic cosmic elements). When a person dies, his physical body decomposes and merges back into the five basic cosmic elements there by completing the cycle.</p>
<p>The wealth cycle</p>
<p>Similar to the way nature follows the cycles of water, energy, carbon etc., human beings have to necessarily follow the cycle of wealth. We receive wealth from pure consciousness following the principle of 'Tathashu- May it be so!' and we need to give back a portion of it to pure consciousness by way of sharing our wealth with the needy. Not sharing amassed wealth is a violation of natural laws and those individuals hoarding it for</p>
<p>The best way to find yourself is to lose yourself in the service of others.</p>
<p>Mahatma Gandhi</p>
<p>Selfishness is the only real atheism; aspiration, unselfishness, the only real religion.</p>
<p>Franklin D. Roosevelt</p>
<p>Let your heart feel for the afflictions and distress of everyone, and let your hand give in proportion to your purse.</p>
<p>George Washington</p>
<p>You are born without anything but you die with your name. so that name must not be a word only, it must be a history.</p>
<p>Chanakya</p>
<p>themselves, without sharing it with the needy, are bound to lose it soon. As per the sayings of Hindu scriptures, the law of recycling is applicable to sharing the wealth with the needy and wealth shared with the needy will come back to the person sharing it and that too will be multiplied many times. Many a time this is the driving principle behind charitable activities. But when such a sharing of wealth is done without expecting anything in return as a nishkama karma (action without seeking returns), such a person develops purity of mind and attains mukti (liberation).</p>
<p>The cycle is thus complete; what came from people has gone back to people many times over -J.R.D.Tata</p>
<p>Let us know look at the invaluable statement of</p>
<p>J.R.D. Tata to understand the concept of completing the wealth cycle wherein he says, “ “The wealth gathered by Jamshedji Tata and his sons in half a century of industrial pioneering</p>
<p>J.R.D. Tata</p>
<p>formed but a minute fraction of the amount by which they enriched the nation. The whole of that wealth is held in trust for</p>
<p>Where can we go to find God if we cannot see Him in our own hearts and in every living being.</p>
<p>The real power of money is the power to give it away.</p>
<p>Narayana Murthy</p>
<p>Those who are happiest are those who do the most for others.</p>
<p>Booker T. Washington</p>
<p>If you’re in the luckiest 1% of humanity, you owe it to the rest of humanity to think about the other 99%.</p>
<p>Warren Buffet</p>
<p>Doing nothing for others is the undoing of ourselves.</p>
<p>Horace Mann</p>
<p>the people and used exclusively for their benefit. The cycle is thus complete; what came from people has gone back to the people many times over.''</p>
<p>Lord Krishna advises Yudhishtira to share his wealth with the needy by Anna Dana</p>
<p><span>All of us are aware that the Pandavas won the famous Kurukshetra war under the guidance of Lord Krishna. But after winning the war, Yudhishtira was restless and deprived of peace of mind though his people had acquired the kingdom, huge wealth and power. The reason for his remorse was the killing of several thousands of people from the both sides, including their nearest and dearest ones. Lord Krishna was a great management expert. Lord Krishna advised the grief-stricken Yudhisthira to do Anna Dana, serving free food to all. The five Pandava brothers performed this ritual and gave very large gifts to the poor. All the people expressed amazement at the greatness and richness </span>of the free food and gifts served to one and all; an act the world had never seen before.</p>
<p>Insights into Karma Yoga principles highlighted by Swami Vivekananda</p>
<p>Let us now look into the wonderful insights put forward by Swami Vivekananda through his teachings of Karma Yoga. We shall take up five excerpts from his lectures on Karma Yoga which will serve as guiding principles in sharing wealth with the needy.</p>
<p>a)By helping the world we help ourselves and not the world</p>
<p>Our duty to others means helping others; doing good to the world. Why should we do good to the world? Apparently to help the world, but really to help ourselves. We should always try to help the world, that should be the highest motive in us; but if we consider well, we find that the world does not require our help at all. This world was not made that you or I should come and help it. ..We cannot deny that there is much misery in it; to go out and help others is, therefore, the best thing we can</p>
<p>In the world take always the position of the giver; help, give service, give anything you can, but keep out barter.</p>
<p>do, although in the long run, we shall find that helping others is only helping ourselves.</p>
<p>b) No beggar whom we have helped has ever owed a single cent to us; we owe everything to him</p>
<p>Yet we must do good; the desire to do good is the highest motive power we have, if we know all the time that it is a privilege to help others. Do not stand on a high pedestal and take five cents in your hand and say, "Here, my poor man," but be grateful that the poor man is there, so that by making a gift to him you are able to help yourself. It is not the receiver that is blessed, but it is the giver. Be thankful that you are allowed to exercise your power of benevolence and mercy in the world, and thus become pure and perfect. All good acts tend to make us pure and perfect. What can we do at best? Build a hospital, make roads, or erect charity asylums. We may organize a charity and collect two or three millions of dollars, build a hospital with one million, with the second give balls and drink champagne, and of the third let the officers steal half, and leave the rest finally to reach the poor; but what are all these? One mighty wind in five minutes can break all your buildings up. What shall we do then? One volcanic eruption may sweep away all our roads and hospitals and cities and buildings. Let us give up all this foolish talk of doing good to the world. It is not waiting for your or my help; yet we must work and constantly do good, because it is a blessing to ourselves. That is the only way we can become perfect. No beggar whom we have helped has ever owed a single cent to us; we owe everything to him, because he has allowed us to exercise our charity on him. It is entirely wrong to think that we have done, or can do, good to the world, or to think that we have helped such and such people. It is a foolish thought, and all foolish thoughts bring misery… If we were really unattached, we should escape all this pain of vain expectation, and could cheerfully do good work in the world.</p>
<p>c) The world is like a dog's tail</p>
<p>This world is like a dog's curly tail, and people have been striving to straighten it out for hundreds of years; but when they let it go, it has curled up again. How could it be otherwise? One must first know how to work without attachment, then one will not be a fanatic. When we know that this world is like a dog's curly tail and will never get straightened, we shall not become fanatics. If there were no fanaticism in the world, it would make much more progress than it does now. It is a mistake to think that fanaticism can make for the progress of mankind. On the contrary, it is a retarding element creating hatred and anger, and causing people to fight each other, and making them unsympathetic. We think that whatever we do or possess is the best in the world, and what we do not do or possess is of no value. So, always remember the instance of the curly tail of the dog whenever you have a tendency to become a fanatic. You need not worry or make yourself sleepless about the world; it will go on without you. When you have avoided fanaticism, then alone will you work well. It is the level - headed man, the calm man, of good judgment and cool nerves, of great sympathy and love, who does good work and so does good to himself. The fanatic is foolish and has no sympathy; he can never straighten the world, nor himself become pure and perfect.</p>
<p>d) Do you ask anything from your children in return for what you have given them?</p>
<p>Do you ask anything from your children in return for what you have given them? It is your duty to work for them, and there the matter ends. In whatever you do for a particular person, a city, or a state, assume the same attitude towards it as you have towards your children --expect nothing in return. If you can invariably take the position of a giver, in which everything given by you is a free offering to the world, without any thought of return, then will your work bring you no attachment. Attachment comes only where we expect a return.</p>
<p>e) Consider work as worship</p>
<p>All thought of obtaining return for the work we do hinders our spiritual progress; nay, in the end it brings misery. There is another way in which this idea of mercy and selfless charity can be put into practice; that is, by looking upon work as "worship" in case we believe in a</p>
<p>Personal God. Here we give up all the fruits of our work unto the Lord, and worshipping Him thus, we have no right to expect anything from mankind for the work we do. The Lord Himself works incessantly and is ever without attachment. Just as water cannot wet the lotus leaf, so work cannot bind the unselfish man by giving rise to attachment to results. The selfless and unattached man may live in the very heart of a crowded and sinful city; he will not be touched by sin.</p>
<p>Let's do a recap!</p>
<p>Similar to the way nature follows cycles of water, energy, carbon and other cycles, human beings too have to necessarily follow the cycle of wealth. Wealth shared with the needy will come back to the person sharing it and that too gets multiplied many times. But when such a sharing of wealth is done without expecting anything in return - as a nishkama karma (action without seeking returns) -such a person develops purity of mind and attains mukti (liberation).</p>
</section>
</section>
</body>
</html>
