<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>Prism Books</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body>
<HR>
<ul>
<li>
<A>Page 1</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 2</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 3</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 4</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 5</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 6</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 7</A>
</li>
<li>
<A>Page 8</A>
</li>
</ul>
</HR>
<h3>Pay for Excellence and get </h3>
<p>Success, Wealth and Fame All Free of Cost !!!</p>
<h6>(Based on Swami Vivekananda’s Message) </h6>
<h3>Pay for Excellence and get </h3>
<p>Success, Wealth and Fame</p>
<p>All Free of Cost !!!</p>
<p>(Based on Swami Vivekananda’s Message)</p>
<p>A.R.K. Sarma</p>
<h2>
<SPAN class="en">PRISM BOOKS PVT LTD </span>
</h2>
<p>ll ll</p>
<p>
<SPAN class="en">Bengaluru Chennai Hyderabad Kochi Kolkata </span>
</p>
<h4>Pay for Excellence and get </h4>
<p>Success, Wealth and Fame All Free of Cost !!!</p>
<h6>(Based on Swami Vivekananda’s Message) </h6>
<p>A.R.K. Sarma</p>
<h3>Published by : Prism Books Pvt. Ltd. </h3>
<p># 1865, 32nd Cross, 10th Main, BSK II StageBengaluru -560 070. Phone: 080-26714108Telefax : 080-26713979, e-mail : info@prismbooks.com</p>
<table>
<tr>
<th>Also at </th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Chennai </th>
<td>: </td>
<td>Tel : 044-42867509, e-mail : prismchennai@prismbooks.com </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Hyderabad </th>
<td>: </td>
<td>Tel : 040-23261828, e-mail : prismhyderabad@prismbooks.com </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Kochi </th>
<td>: </td>
<td>Tel : 0484-4000945, e-mail : prismkochi@prismbooks.com </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Kolkata </th>
<td>: </td>
<td>Tel : 033-24297957, e-mail : prismkolkata@prismbooks.com </td>
</tr>
</table>
<h5>© Author, 2012 </h5>
<p>Pages : 192 Price : R 140/Printed on : 70 gsm Maplitho</p>
<p>No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.</p>
<p>ISBN : 978-81-7286-755-3 Printed at : Adithya Printers, Bengaluru</p>
<section class="level2 numbered" id="id-.">
<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Publisher’s Note</h2>
<p>It is our privilege that during the 150<span><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="999-aside.xhtml#id-">th <\/a><\/sup></span>year of Swami Vivekananda’s birth, we are publishing this wonderful title “Pay for Excellence and get Success, Wealth and Fame all free of cost” by Shri A. R. K. Sarma.</p>
<p>Shri Sarma, an ardent devotee of the Ramakrishna Mutt, has been doing a yeoman service to the society in general and the youth in particular by meticulously bringing to the front, the message of Swami Vivekananda, in a very simple and lucid style. He very carefully relates the Swamiji’s thoughts to most modern, contemporary views on Management and Self-development.</p>
<p>“Don’t look back - forward, infinite energy, infinite enthusiasm, infinite daring, and infinite patience -then alone can great deeds be accomplished”, so says Swami Vivekananda. Shri Sarma takes us through a repertoire of such thoughts and deeds in his writings.</p>
<p>PRISM is pleased to be publishing this work and hope to do more in the series with the support of Shri Sarma. It is a</p>
<p>th</p>
<p>matter of pride for PRISM, that during the 150 year of the Swamiji, we are embarking on a project to translate Swamiji’s works from Bengali into Kannada. We hope that the readers will enjoy and benefit from these works.</p>
<p>Pranesh Siravara</p>
</section>
<section class="level2 numbered" id="id-.">
<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Contents</h2>
<p>Chapter-1 1 Tathasthu ! may it be so!</p>
<p>Chapter-2 27 Pay for Excellence and get Success, Wealth and Farm, All free of cost !!!</p>
<p>Chapter-3 57 Think of it, dream of it and live on it</p>
<p>Chapter-4 89 Thinkers and Doers</p>
<p>Chapter-5 115 Let the brain, muscles, nerves, every part of your body, be full of the goal</p>
<p>Chapter-6 161 Share your wealth with the needy and complete the cycle</p>
</section>
</section>
</body>
</html>
