<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000c.1">
		<p class="text-center">Dedicated to<br /><strong>my family and friends</strong></p>
	</section>
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000c.2">
		<h1 class="level1-title text-center" epub:type="title">Note from the Author</h1>
		<p>First and foremost, I thank my family for supporting and helping me. Special thanks to my mother for encouraging me through the writer’s block I faced. A big thank you to Mrs. Sowbhagya Eswaraiah for the wonderful foreword. It means a lot to me.</p>
		<p>My sincere thanks goes to Prism Books Pvt. Ltd for publishing my book. I would also like to thank my friends and teachers for encouraging me. Above all, thank you readers!</p>
		<p>Reach me at: harshithahebbar23@gmail.com</p>
		<p>Harshitha Hebbar</p>
	</section>
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000c.3">
		<h1 class="level1-title text-center" epub:type="title">Foreword</h1>
		<p class="myquote">The role of a writer is not to say what we can all say, but what we are unable to say. </p>
		<p class="quote-author">—Anais Nin</p>
		<p>It is said that it is never too late to start anything in life.  But this young author, who is studying  in 8th standard has redefined that statement and has started writing from a young age.  Well, she is still very young !</p>
		<p>For me what stood out in the book <em>Legacy of the Lotus </em>(The Friend’s Quest 2) is the clarity of the thought of the young author which is a refreshing change.  She is sure what she wants to say and has narrated the story with remarkable ease and simplicity.   Also, the attention to detail for each character cannot be missed!</p>
		<p>The book talks about the adventures of the characters Ron, Pal, Amy, Max etc. and their incredible adventure in the Southern part of India.  It has a few life lessons as well - never underestimate your enemy !</p>
		<p>The book is a must read - especially for children as it talks about the challenges that they will face in their lives and how to overcome them.</p>
		<p>Harshitha, take a bow.  You have a bright future ahead !</p>
		<p>My love and blessings to this young talented writer. The world is an oyster and you are its pearl.</p>
		<p>Sowbhagya Eswaraiah<br />Principal( Rtd)<br />Government Polytechnic College for Women<br />Bangalore</p>
		<p>March 25, 2017</p>
	</section>
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000c.4">
		<h1 class="level1-title text-center" epub:type="title">CHARACTERS</h1>
		<table>
			<tr>
				<td>Ron</td>
				<td>Formerly from Earth, now a Ronen</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Pal</td>
				<td> Golden Retriever, Ron’s bond</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Carra</td>
				<td> Formerly from Earth, now a Ronen</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Tabitha</td>
				<td> Persian Cat, Carra’s bond</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>May</td>
				<td> Formerly from Earth, now a Ronen</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Snowflake</td>
				<td> White rabbit, May’s bond</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Josh</td>
				<td> Formerly from Earth, now a Ronen</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Pete</td>
				<td> Parrot, Josh’s bond</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Amy</td>
				<td> Carra’s mother</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Max</td>
				<td> Ron’s father</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Lyke</td>
				<td> Streo</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Zevyn</td>
				<td> Streo, Lyke’s sister</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Avaron</td>
				<td> Leader of the Ronens</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Chester</td>
				<td> Lion, Avaron’s bond</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Iris</td>
				<td> Ronen, daughter of Avaron</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Ruben</td>
				<td> Hawk, Iris’ bond</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Ivy</td>
				<td> Ronen, daughter of Avaron</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Victoria</td>
				<td> White tiger, Ivy’s bond</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Leif</td>
				<td> Ronen, Avaron’s son</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Romial</td>
				<td> Ronen deputy</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>Miva</td>
				<td> Leader of the Streos</td>
			</tr>
		</table>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
