<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-002">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Chapter 2</h1>
		<p>Iris, Ron, May and Ruben had gone for a stroll in the forest when they were joined by Lykenzar. Lykenzar was a Streo, son of the evil Grinlaut. Lyke’s mother had killed Grinlaut. Now his mother, his sister Zevyn and he were staying with the Ronens. </p>
		<p>“Who is that boy?” he asked.</p>
		<p>“Dunno,” Ron shrugged. “He blabbered some gibberish when he got here.”</p>
		<p>“Hmm,” Lykenzar furrowed his eyebrows, lost in thought. “Do you know the Shadow?” he asked suddenly.</p>
		<p>“Shadow? Are you referring to this?” Ron asked, pointing to his shadow.</p>
		<p>“No, no. The Shadow of Death, Shadow, Death Lord. Have you ever heard of him?”</p>
		<p>“No,” Ruben said, puzzled.</p>
		<p>Lyke just nodded. “Are you going to tell us who he is?” May asked.</p>
		<p>“He’s dangerous. Beware the boy. He’s an accomplice of the Shadow,” Lyke said and disappeared into the undergrowth, his brown wolf tail twitching.</p>
		<p>Ron looked at May and Iris. The two shrugged, and they resumed their walk.</p>
		<p>Lyke was talking to his sister, Zevyn, when the three, with Ruben, returned from their walk. The two were arguing heatedly. </p>
		<p>“So? Does it very much matter? Yes, he is trouble, his character spells that out, but do you really think that running off on a foolhardy mission will solve him?” Zevyn was asking her brother.</p>
		<p>“It is most likely that he will cause problems quicker than you can say ‘Ronen’. Ivy’s parents might see through his veil someday, but what if it’s too late then? I’m sure...” Lyke broke off when he saw the three standing there.</p>
		<p>“You know what guys? I’m just going to go catch up on my sleep. You guys can continue,” Ron started slowly backing away. “You are not going anywhere.” Iris grabbed his jacket and pulled him back to the ragged circle they had formed.</p>
		<p>“We need to find out that boy’s intention. He means no good, I can smell trouble,” Zevyn said, flicking her catlike ears. Her eyes turned huge as Ron suddenly tumbled down, face on the floor.</p>
		<p>“Score!” Pal cheered from on top of Ron’s back. “Pal!” Ron screeched. The golden retriever jumped off his bond’s back and sat on the ground. Ron got up painfully, helped by Lyke. As Ron nursed his back, Lyke gently scolded Pal. Lyke never went hard on canines, because he too was part dog. But Zevyn was more cat, and had an attachment to felines.</p>
		<p>“Lyke,” Zevyn tapped the ground impatiently. He got up, and they continued their discussion, this time joined by Pal and Snowflake, who had appeared to see Pal’s ‘score’.</p>
		<p>“You are right, Zevyn. We do have to find out what exactly that boy is up to.” Lyke agreed. “What should we do?” Snowflake asked quietly.</p>
		<p>“Start off by telling your parents that he works for the Shadow. They know who he is,” Zevyn addressed Iris. “And they will know of his deeds as well,” she muttered too soft so that the others won’t hear. Iris nodded. </p>
		<p>“But how will they know who this Shadow guy is?” Ron asked indignantly. “They will, trust me,” Lyke said. </p>
		<p>“Come on, then. What are you waiting for?” May said, setting off.</p>
		<p>Iris smiled as she followed her cheerful friend. They were joined by Josh, Carra and Ivy, who saw them walking by.</p>
		<p>“What’s going on?” Pete, Josh’s bond, asked.</p>
		<p>“You will get to know soon,” Zevyn muttered darkly, twitching her ears in fear and anxiety. Ivy and Carra exchanged glances. The winged girl was short tempered, but never this grumpy. They followed Iris into the leader’s cabin.</p>
		<p>“Mother, Father? Can we come in?” Iris called out. “Come in!” her mother called cheerfully from inside. The group trudged in. </p>
		<p>“What is it?” Avaron, the leader asked. “It’s about the new boy,” Lyke mumbled. He seemed to be uncomfortable talking about the boy. </p>
		<p>“Well? What about him?” Iris’ mother narrowed her sharp green eyes curiously.</p>
		<p>“We know him,” Zevyn stepped forward confidently. “He works for the Death Lord.” The two leaders let out gasps. </p>
		<p>“What?” </p>
		<p>A sharp roar made them turn around. Chester, Avaron’s bond, and Raptor, the leader’s wife’s bond, stood side by side at the door.</p>
		<p>“Impossible,” Raptor muttered, shaking his black head. The two lions entered and sat beside their bonds. “It’s true!” Zevyn insisted.</p>
		<p>“That explains why there was a weird sound from his room last night,” Avaron murmured. </p>
		<p>“What does he want?” Josh asked.</p>
		<p>Avaron looked up. He started telling a story. As he spoke, his eyes glazed over, as if drowning in the memory.</p>
		<p>“The Shadow of Death always wanted power. He bears scars of the battles he fought and won in search of power. He massacred my earlier tribe. You do know that I was not always Ronen, don’t you?” He asked, looking up. </p>
		<p>“Well, yeah. But they told us that you got lost and found the Ronens,” Carra said, pointing at Ivy and Iris.</p>
		<p>“That is because I told them that. I had not got lost; my mother took me to the Ronens and begged them to keep me. She did not survive though. Shortly after the Ronens took us in, she died of her injuries. The Shadow had done that to our tribe. So, I grew up here. When I was young, I dreamed of vengeance. But the leader told me revenge is not always the answer. He looked after me like a father. My dreams of revenge faded away, and instead, I became leader. But now that he has come back, I think my chance has come,” he ended with a sigh. “But I’m getting old. I do not think I can do it.”</p>
		<p>The friends listened in silence. </p>
		<p>“But what is he after?” Tabitha asked finally. Everyone looked at the white cat. “He is after something, isn’t he?”</p>
		<p>“Yes. Someone please fetch Minkin.” There was a scrabbling sound as Josh and Ron both rushed to the entrance. Josh beat Ron to the entrance and dashed out. He raced in after some time, with Minkin walking at his own pace. </p>
		<p>“What did you want, Avaron?” Minkin asked, stepping in. Avaron repeated the incidents. “What do you think he is after?” he asked.</p>
		<p>“Hmm. Do you think he is after the treasure?” Minkin mused thoughtfully. </p>
		<p>“What treasure?” Snowflake asked.</p>
		<p>“The grand treasure of the Ronens. It is a lotus, a white, glittering lotus made of diamonds. It lies in an unexplored, dangerous part of Earth. It is the key to a secret which only the leader of the Clan knows. The Shadow must be after it,” Avaron said. </p>
		<p>“Why is it on Earth?” Ron asked. Carra rolled her eyes. May stared at him in exasperation. Ron looked around. “Why is it on Earth?” he repeated stupidly. </p>
		<p>“The Ronens had sent someone to hide it away in a dangerous place. Later we got to know it was on Earth. And now the Shadow is after it,” he let out a sigh. “I need that lotus now. It is the only way to defeat the Shadow of Death.”</p>
		<p>He looked up. Everyone was watching him in silence. The children had different looks on their faces. Lykenzar and Josh looked determined to get the lotus. Ron looked frightened. Zevyn was smiling; the thought of adventure tempted her. Carra was surprised at the news. May had narrowed her eyes, clouded with thoughts. Iris and Ivy were looking at him with keen interest. The animals, though, seemed only willing to do whatever their bonds wanted to do.</p>
		<p>“Where exactly is it?” Josh asked.</p>
		<p>“It’s not in the ocean, is it?” Ron asked. Ever since their last escapade over the ocean, Ron had been petrified of oceans.</p>
		<p>“No,” Avaron chuckled. “It’s in the middle of a very dangerous forest. Don’t look so excited, there is absolutely no way I am sending you children there.”</p>
		<p>“It is a very dangerous place, as he said. It is certainly not a place for children like you. There are mythical creatures guarding the lotus, ones you have never encountered or seen the likes of before,” Iris’ mother warned sternly. Lykenzar looked disappointed.</p>
		<p>“Then how will you get it back?” Josh asked.</p>
		<p>“I will send a strong team to retrieve it for me,” The clan leader said. “Chester, can you get Romial for me? I want to discuss this with him.”</p>
		<p>Chester and Raptor went together. The two had grown very close, and did almost everything together.</p>
		<p>The friends also exited the cave. Instantly Ivy was called away for some work. She was very busy now that she was counted an adult in the clan.</p>
		<p>Lykenzar still looked determined to go. Two days later, he elaborated a plan of sneaking into the retrieval party and staying hidden until they reached Earth. “They will not be able to do anything then,” he said proudly.</p>
		<p>Pete screeched with laughter. Lyke glared at him. “You can’t pull off something like that,” the parrot said. “I am not stupid, you know,” Lyke muttered. “Avaron will find out, no matter how clever you try to act,” Tabitha said, shaking her head.</p>
		<p>Ruben agreed. Victoria suddenly whipped her head around, in the direction of the forest. Ruben and Pete immediately spread their wings and took to the skies. Iris looked up worriedly. </p>
		<p>The two birds landed.</p>
		<p>“What’s up?” Pal asked. “There’s something wrong,” Ruben said.</p>
		<p>“No time to explain?” Tabitha asked sarcastically. “Tell Avaron,” Zevyn replied. They turned to go, but Josh had already disappeared. He emerged out of the leader’s cave a few seconds later, with Avaron at his side. </p>
		<p>There was a lot of noise as the winged army rose to the sky and positioned themselves, ready for attack from the air. A scout immediately swooped forward, unseen by any rival. She came back safely.</p>
		<p>“It’s the Death Lord,” she said, her green eyes visibly worried. “Great Stars, have mercy on us!” Iris’ mother cried.</p>
		<p>“The retrieval party hasn’t left yet. It’s impossible to send them now! We need them on the army. What do we do now?” Avaron desperately turned to his wife for advice.</p>
		<p>“There’s nothing else to do,” she said flatly. “Send the children.”</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
