<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-003">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Chapter 3</h1>
		<p>Both Avaron and Lyke’s eyes widened, but for different reasons. The leader was shocked and stared at his wife in disbelief; Lyke was overjoyed and surprised.</p>
		<p>“But we cannot!” Avaron exclaimed.</p>
		<p>“Would you rather have the entire clan massacred or let the children go on a mission they can accomplish?” Iris’ mother countered. Lyke nodded vigorously, whispering, “You have my full support.”</p>
		<p>“Very well. You may go, but not you, Ivy, nor you, Victoria. We need both of your support here. You can send your wishes to your sister, but you have to stay here,” Avaron shook his head. Ivy opened her mouth to argue, but then decided not to.</p>
		<p>Instead, she and Victoria turned to their friends.They quickly said their farewells, and stood aside. Avaron approached them. Lyke and his sister were quivering with excitement. </p>
		<p>“Take Minkin with you to the edge of the forest. He will know what to do. Take care, and all the best. May good luck go with you,” he said quickly, ushering them to the edge of the clearing.</p>
		<p>Minkin joined them shortly, and the group swiftly made their way to the border of the forest. Minkin looked up at the sky. It was full of dark heavy clouds. He looked back at the little band of animals and Ronens. </p>
		<p>He quickly arranged a few vials of coloured mist, which formed shapes of each of the beings present there. Snowflake sniffed it tentatively. It immediately formed a very ghastly look alike of her. She shuddered and retreated to the group. Minkin smiled.</p>
		<p>“Do not take any notice of them. They like to scare others a lot,” he explained. He set a few other glass bottles around it with the help of his bond, who had accompanied them. He started mumbling a series of spells. Thunder rumbled overhead, and a flash of lightning blinded everyone momentarily. </p>
		<p>When they opened their eyes again, they saw the clouds opening up, leaving a small gap between them. A yellow light flooded through the opening and formed a circle a few feet in front of them. </p>
		<p>“When you step in that circle you will be transported back to Earth. But before you go, we have to change Lykenzar and Zevyn into normal human beings. It will take only a momentum or two,” Minkin took a phial of blue mist and, muttering another string of indistinguishable spells, opened the phial and let it engulf the two siblings. </p>
		<p>When the mist cleared, Lykenzar had lost his paws and tail. Zevyn didn’t have her wings, and her ears were humanlike now. </p>
		<p>Immediately, Minkin pushed all of them into the spot of light, which seemed to be dancing in impatience.</p>
		<p>Iris and Pal, who were at the head of the group, floated upwards upon entering the shaft of light. The others were only a footstep behind. They reached the source of the light, and disappeared all at once. Minkin, watching their progress, nodded in satisfaction and hurried back to camp with his bond at his side.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>“I can’t believe he did that!” Zevyn complained.</p>
		<p>“Look at this! Just <em>look</em> at it! This is so amazing!” Unlike his sister, Lykenzar was enjoying every little insect, every single leaf, every shaft of the sunlight in the woods they had emerged in.</p>
		<p>Ruben had floated upwards on the thermal currents, and was soaring around. He met a fellow hawk, and was gliding with him. Pete preferred to ride on Josh’s shoulder, occasionally roosting on Pal’s back. Tabitha and Snowflake padded side by side, behind Zevyn. May and Iris were leading the group, searching for fresh water. They still didn’t know where they had emerged, but Carra reckoned it was somewhere in the Caledonian forest in Scotland. </p>
		<p>“I’d been here once before,” she said. </p>
		<p>They walked on, passing a curious woodpecker who decided to follow them all the way. They came to the borderline. Carra pushed her way to the front, blinking in the sunlight. Her eyes widened when she saw a hauntingly familiar figure. </p>
		<p>She dashed away from the cover of the trees, nearly colliding with the figure. </p>
		<p>“Mom! It’s me, Carra!” she cried. Her mother, Amy, let out an ‘oh! in shock. Recognition broke out on her face like sunlight, and she instantly hugged her daughter. </p>
		<p>“I missed you so much, sweetie,” her mother whispered. She held her daughter by her shoulders and pushed her away, squinting at her. “Let’s have a good look at you,” she said, scrutinizing Carra. “Hmmm, you look just the same.”</p>
		<p>The others emerged from the woods. Amy looked up in surprise. “Ron! May, Josh!” she called out happily. She looked at the other children in bewilderment. “Who are those kids, dear?” she asked her daughter. </p>
		<p>“That’s Iris, Lykenzar and Zevyn,” she said, introducing them to her mother. She nodded.</p>
		<p>Tabitha jumped on Amy. “Tabitha! You haven’t changed a bit!” </p>
		<p>“No, I haven’t,” Tabitha said without thinking. Amy shrieked in surprise and nearly dropped the cat.</p>
		<p>“You can talk!” she exclaimed breathlessly.</p>
		<p>“It’s part of being a Ronen. Their bonds can talk,” Zevyn explained. Carra’s mother nodded, still slightly confused.</p>
		<p>“What are you doing here?” she asked. “We’ll explain later, mom.” Carra said. </p>
		<p>“Why don’t you kids all come over? I’m sure there’s enough space,” Amy invited. </p>
		<p>“Mom, what are <em>you</em> doing here anyway?” Carra asked.</p>
		<p>“I just came for a vacation. I had a feeling to come here. Maybe it’s because you ended up here. I guess fate has its own way of keeping us ready,” her mother shrugged.</p>
		<p>“Where are you staying?” Ron asked. “A hotel room,” she cast a quick glance at the animals. “I’m not sure if they allow animals though.” </p>
		<p>“We can go back and stay outside,” May suggested. </p>
		<p>Amy nodded, and led them out of the park. “I rented a car,” she explained as she unlocked a blue minivan. Everyone filed in. </p>
		<p>She revved the engine, and the vehicle lurched forward. Ruben barely managed to fit in the seat. He was a huge hawk, and his gigantic wings, though folded, occupied a lot of space.</p>
		<p>“What are you doing here?” Amy asked again, looking at them through the rear view mirror. </p>
		<p>“We came to get a lotus,” they explained everything. Carra’s mother listened politely, without interrupting. </p>
		<p>She let out an “Oh,” in the end. She digested the information. “I’m coming with you,” she said in the end.</p>
		<p>“What!” Carra’s eyes widened.</p>
		<p>“I am. I can’t let you do this on your own. Certainly not. I’m pretty sure-”</p>
		<p>She cut herself off and swerved hard to the right as something hit the minivan hard. The car toppled on its side. Tabitha let out a hiss in alarm. Pete squawked indignantly. Ruben shook his mighty feathers, and flew out a shattered window, to deal with whatever hit them. They knew immediately that it wasn’t any vehicle which hit them; it was night time, and the road had been completely empty.</p>
		<p>Amy kicked open the passenger door and climbed out. She helped the others out. Up above, a furious battle was waging on. Ruben, a fiery ball of golden-brown, drew back and dove forward, knocking his opponent, who was also air-borne. As far as they could see in the dim light, the other bird was a pitch black smudge in the light of the moon. It screeched raucously. </p>
		<p>Pete swooped up to join the fight. He and Ruben quickly overpowered the black bird, who was still nipping and clawing without mercy. The two birds brought down the black smudge to the ground, where Tabitha and Pal helped them to pin down the colossal bird. </p>
		<p>Snowflake crept forward. The black bird spat at her. Its beady red eyes were brimming with hatred. It snapped its beak and lunged at the rabbit, but Tabitha raked her claws over its wings. The bird screeched in pain. </p>
		<p>Iris knelt close to its spitting face. </p>
		<p>“Who are you and what do you want?” she growled. </p>
		<p>“Let go of me!” it shrieked in a high raspy voice. “Please. It’s not my fault!” it sobbed. “I’m Night. They told me to attack you. I’m only following orders. If I don’t, they’ll kill me!”</p>
		<p>Tabitha and Pal took a step back. Before anyone could utter a sound, the bird wrenched itself free from their grip and flew away into the oncoming darkness, laughing.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
