<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-005">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Chapter 5</h1>
		<p>“The flight’s landed! You have my permission to remove your seatbelts. Please get up and move out in single file, arms stiff. Now, march!” Jemma joked, jumping out of her seat. She gave a huge grin to Pete as he flew out. </p>
		<p>“I prefer to use my own wings to this artificial set,” Ruben grumbled as he clambered to the door. </p>
		<p>“Don’t worry, you’ll get used to it.” Jemma flashed him an encouraging smile, and walked to the end. She ushered the rest of the animals outside. She had grown very fond of all the animals, and she kept asking them to visit her again. </p>
		<p>“We’ll try, don’t worry,” Tabitha purred. Pal licked her arm. “Thanks for the ride, Jem. You’re an amazing pilot!” </p>
		<p>“Aww, thanks, Pal.”</p>
		<p>“I’ll miss you,” Snowflake said. “I’ll miss you too. I hope to see you again soon.”</p>
		<p>They all said their farewells and stood back. Jemma entered her plane and took off. </p>
		<p>They walked out of the clearing, and were immediately pushed into a bustling crowd. Pete and Ruben immediately took refuge in the sky. May and Zevyn picked up Tabitha and Snowflake before they were trampled. Nobody took any heed of the group of foreigners. They walked on, the sounds of hundreds of shopkeepers shouting for attention getting to them. </p>
		<p>They managed to make it to a quiet corner, where the children collapsed on the two benches there. Pete and Ruben joined them. </p>
		<p>“India’s a big country. I wonder where we should even start searching for the lotus,” Josh sighed. His friends nodded in agreement. Amy was busy making a phone call.</p>
		<p>“Here’s a good place as any,” May said.</p>
		<p>“I doubt it would be in such a commercial place,” Lyke said.</p>
		<p>Zevyn shook her head. “The lotus was kept like a millennium before this town or city or whatever even developed.”</p>
		<p>“I do not think it was that long ago. Lyke does have a point,” Iris said. Lyke gave his sister an I-told-you-so look.</p>
		<p>“Karnataka!” Ron burst out. </p>
		<p>“What-a-kata?” Carra asked, confused. She put a hand on her cousin’s forehead. “Ron, are you ill or something?”</p>
		<p>“No. Karnataka. Karnataka,” he repeated. Carra looked at Josh. He shrugged and turned his attention back to Ron, who was still mumbling ‘Karnataka’ over and over. </p>
		<p>“What did you say, Ron?” Amy had hung up, and was looking at her nephew. </p>
		<p>“Karnataka,” he said again, looking at his aunt. Her eyes flew wide open. </p>
		<p>“Karnataka’s a state of India!” she said, smiling broadly. </p>
		<p>Pal turned to look at his bond. “Ron, you’re a genius!” </p>
		<p>“Well done, Ron,” Zevyn said. Iris grinned at him.</p>
		<p>“What did I just say?” Ron asked, suddenly wondering why he was getting so much attention. </p>
		<p>“It must be Avaron. He must be sending us mind messages! That is why India flashed to me!” Ruben suddenly said, his eyes betraying his excitement. </p>
		<p>Iris nodded in agreement. </p>
		<p>“Well then. To Karnataka!” Amy said jovially, and the band set off to find the airport. </p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>“Well?” the Shadow snarled in Avaron’s face. The leader didn’t flinch. Instead, he spat at the Death Lord.</p>
		<p>“You don’t deserve to even exist on any planet. You should end your miserable, vile existence,” the Ronen leader hissed.</p>
		<p>“I should now, should I?” the Shadow of Death purred silkily, winding his mist-like body around Avaron. “And why don’t you help me?” he continued, curling his thorn-like claws under Avaron’s chin. </p>
		<p>“Do you think me to be so helpless, so pitiful, so weak, to not see past your devious but meagre attempts to stall me? Do you think that I would fall for that same old trick your tribe tried to use? What do you think of me, the Great Shadow, the Powerful Death Lord, the all mighty Shadow of Death?” He brought his claws down and scratched the stone on the floor, leaving a long trail of claw marks.</p>
		<p>“I think you are a plain old idiot,” Avaron muttered under his breath, but not loud enough for the gloating Lord to hear.</p>
		<p>It had been two and a half days since the children left. Half a day after Minkin returned to the camp, the Death Lord had barged into the camp, striding straight to where the leader stood. The Shadow’s hideous army had wreaked havoc across the Ronen territory. The Shadow had tried every day to extract information from every single Ronen. </p>
		<p>The winged boy scuttled up to the impatient Lord. </p>
		<p>“What do you want now, you impeccable nuisance?” the Shadow growled. The boy stretched up to reach the Lord’s face and muttered something. The Lord’s face widened in a grin of pleasure, but immediately vanished. </p>
		<p>“Of course. I had thought of that too, and I was just going to implement it,” he said triumphantly. Avaron rolled his eyes. The pompous Lord refused to let anything pass him by!</p>
		<p>The Shadow of Death turned to face Avaron. Lord faced leader, both spitting vengeance on each other.</p>
		<p>The shadow leaned forward, until his mist-like face was inches from Avaron’s. </p>
		<p>“This is not over. I will defeat you. And when I do, I <em>will</em> kill you!”</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
