<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-007">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Chapter 7</h1>
		<p>The Shadow Lord drifted past where Avaron was tied up. The Ronen leader recoiled at the stench which followed the black figure.</p>
		<p>Avaron turned to see his eldest daughter, who was being forced to toil at building weapons with the other Ronens. Sharp squeals occasionally accompanied the clanging of metal against metal as they worked hard under the cruel eye of the Shadow’s captains. </p>
		<p>Leif, Avaron’s son, paused for a minute to wipe his brow, but was rewarded with a lash to his back from a whip. He glared at his tormentor, but continued to work nevertheless.</p>
		<p>The Shadow suddenly whipped around and fixed his cold gaze on Avaron. </p>
		<p>“You are going to regret this,” he hissed, his ever-changing form wrapped around himself, and a clawed hand slashed out from the mist which formed the Shadow’s body. The hand came inches to Avaron’s face, but it retreated. </p>
		<p>The Death Lord ranted off about another long twisted story about how the future was going to be glorious, for him, of course, not for Avaron. But the Ronen leader wasn’t listening to him, he switched his mind to the children he’d sent back to Earth. </p>
		<p>He remembered how he had sent them mind messages to tell them where they would find the treasure. But as his train of thought grew longer, he became wearier. His eyelids drooped, and he drifted off to sleep.</p>
		<p>He woke up with a start. The Shadow flashed past him in a blur of black. Avaron tried to retreat, but found himself backed against a solid wall. He turned around, but saw the forest instead. Then he realized; the wall was there, but not there. <em>Quantum physics</em>, he thought vaguely. </p>
		<p>Another blur and a slap to the face brought him back to the problem at hand- Shadow of Death. He struck out with his foot, hoping to trip the Shadow, but he just floated past. When Avaron brought his foot back, he was shocked to see that it was decayed. His eyes widened, and his heart thumped so loud, he thought the Death Lord could hear it.</p>
		<p>He bolted up straight out of his sleep, his face awash with perspiration. He checked his foot immediately; it was fine, no sign of decay or rot. <em>It was a dream</em>, he thought. Realization hit him as sharp as an arrow. <em>If we try to fight back against him, we will also rot away. We should escape. But how?</em></p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
