<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-009">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Chapter 9</h1>
		<p>“Wake up!” </p>
		<p>“What?” Ivy asked groggily. She was lying on the cold floor next to Avaron’s feet. Leif lay beside his sister, and he too stirred. He saw the urgency in his father’s eyes, and quickly shoved Ivy into full consciousness. She sat up in a heartbeat, but Leif pulled her back down.</p>
		<p>“Do you <em>want</em> every guard here to know that we are going to escape?” he hissed fiercely. She quickly apologized softly, and looked around over her brother’s shoulder. Once she saw that it was quiet, she turned her attention to her father, who was still looking annoyed that she had woken up only after he called her about a dozen times. She shrugged apologetically to her father; a movement she hoped hadn’t alerted the nearby guard. </p>
		<p>“Come on,” Leif whispered. He slowly slid across the floor, finding it a little difficult under the bulk of the stuffing he had worn to look like his father. </p>
		<p>It had been two days since Avaron had received his dream. He had figured out a plan then- Leif was to dress up as him, while he would escape to get help. Leif would not be missed; he had not done anything to stand out. Avaron had managed to untie his hands; it was much easier to remove the knots that bound his legs together. </p>
		<p>Now that the plan was finally in action, Avaron felt a little nervous. Leif finally reached his father. He quickly took up the leader’s place, and as Ivy helped her father tie her brother to the tree, she could not help but marvel at how similar Leif and Avaron looked. At first, it was doubted that the plan could work- Avaron was hefty and had broad shoulders, while Leif was thin and lean like his mother. But with all the extra padding, the two were as similar as the mud on the ground.</p>
		<p>Avaron looked up briefly, glad to see that the sentry on duty hadn’t noticed anything strange, and kept staring into the distance, while his companion snored at his post. The Ronen leader grunted with amusement, and bade a hasty farewell to his son and daughter. Then he made his way out, breaking into a run once among the thicker and denser trees. </p>
		<p>As dawn broke out, he was sure that he had made it away safely. <em>But do not be too sure</em>, he reminded himself. The Death Lord was a tricky one. He had spies throughout Imagneus. </p>
		<p>He jogged on, pushing past undergrowths and moving on trails he had never explored before. But as he neared a small clearing, he heard a rustling sound. He spun around, dreading that it was one of the Shadow’s minions, come to take him back. Instead, two faces, so familiar he cried out in surprise, emerged from behind a tree. </p>
		<p>“Chester! Romial! What are you doing here?” </p>
		<p>Chester bounded forward. </p>
		<p>“What do you expect? That your bond should sit and do nothing while you endanger your life on a quest that has more options of failing than succeeding? Absolutely not!” </p>
		<p>Romial nodded in agreement.</p>
		<p>Avaron sighed, and felt a smile warming his face. “Of course you can join me. I could not ask for better companions than the two of you.” </p>
		<p>“Well then. Shall we move on? Where are we going first?” Romial asked.</p>
		<p>“I thought of gathering the tribes and clans of every place to help us in this battle. After all, we are united against this threat.” </p>
		<p>His travelling companions nodded. “There is sense in that,” Romial agreed. “Let us proceed then, and rid this planet of that filthy creature once and for all!” </p>
		<p>“We reached!” Chester cried out, waving his tail excitedly. Romial and Avaron nodded wearily. They were going to meet the queen of Hikints. They shuffled towards the city lying in front of them. A sentry at the gates widened his eyes in surprise at the sight of the Ronen leader and deputy together. He quickly ushered them in, calling for another soldier to escort them. They nodded thankfully at the sentry and followed the soldier to meet the queen of the Hikints. </p>
		<p>As they walked down the little streets of the Hikint town, Avaron remembered how the Hikints had taken ideas from the humans to build their cities. A few passer bys looked at them in surprise, but no comments were passed. </p>
		<p>They finally arrived at the beautiful carved door of the queen’s castle. The soldier politely knocked, and the doors swung open, revealing a magnificent hall, decorated with exotic plants. Avaron and his companions marvelled at the complexity of the structure. </p>
		<p>The trio, led by another soldier, entered the palace, and made their way to the Hearing Hall; the hall where the queen settled disputes and responded to complaints. </p>
		<p>As they set foot inside the hall, the queen rose from her seat, astonished. </p>
		<p>“Avaron! What a surprise!” she smiled. Avaron nodded respectfully. The common folk rose from their seats in respect. </p>
		<p>“Please, have a seat,” the queen invited. Avaron led his companions to the front and whispered, “We need to talk to you; it is very important.” The queen nodded immediately, and quickly told her minister to postpone the meeting. She rose elegantly from her seat and led the way to a chamber.</p>
		<p>Once seated, Avaron launched into a detailed story of everything that had happened. Romial and Chester took over the story when he paused. The queen listened intently, not interrupting till their tale was finished. She was silent for some time, thinking over what they had just told her. </p>
		<p>“We will gladly help,” she said at last. “This danger threatens not only your clan, but every other tribe in this planet. I will send one of my people with you, so that you have more chances of getting help.”</p>
		<p>Avaron almost rolled his eyes. <em>She just wants to show that she is helping us so much. She obviously will want a return favour after this.</em></p>
		<p>But instead, he said, “Thank you so much for your help. I will not forget this.” </p>
		<p>Chester flicked his ear, looking slightly irritated that Avaron seemed to be actually genuine, when it was clear that all that the queen wanted was a chance to show herself great. But Avaron caught his bond’s eye, and he understood that the leader thought the same. </p>
		<p>The trio bid their farewell and exited the gate, with a young soldier Hikint behind them. </p>
		<p>Avaron and Romial took the lead, with the Hikint behind them, and Chester bringing up the rear. Romial questioned the Hikint, and after the third attempt, managed to find out the shy Hikint’s name, but forgot it immediately, so long was his name. After asking again, the Hikint told them to call him Sabre. Avaron was surprised, finding the name Sabre a bit too savage for the shy Hikint, but didn’t comment. </p>
		<p>As dusk fell, they decided to stop for a rest, and make camp. Sabre offered to keep watch while the others slept, and they agreed. They quickly ate, and the three Ronens slept, leaving Sabre to stand guard. </p>
		<p>They woke at dawn, surprised to see Sabre standing over a weird creature, which was bound up. Avaron felt his doubts disappear. <em>Sabre is not only good, he is so silent! None of us woke up, and he didn’t wake us up either. He is smart, </em>Avaron thought. </p>
		<p>They disposed of the creature and continued their journey.</p>
		<p>They managed to rally help from half a dozen other tribes, and set their attack on the next Night of Faztex. </p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
