<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-012">
		<h1 class="level1-title text-center" epub:type="title">Chapter 12</h1>
		<p>“Weapons ready?”</p>
		<p>The gruff voice of the general Streo brought Avaron back to reality. He looked around, shaking away the worries of his Ronens. The Streo troops were engaged in a mock combat, in training for the war against the Shadow.</p>
		<p>“March! Single line! Battle position, steady now. Aim, fire!” the steady drone of the general’s commands rang out in the air.</p>
		<p>At the general’s order, a shower of arrows rained on the battlefield, which was full of dummy enemies.</p>
		<p>A couple of soldiers scuttled along the battleground, picking up the arrows. They quickly retreated as another bunch of arrows flew across the sky and embedded themselves in the tough soil.</p>
		<p>On the far side, a group of Streos were duelling with swords. The lash of metal echoed around the clearing. On yet another corner, some Streos were racing around a very intense obstacle course.</p>
		<p>Avaron walked around to join the duelling Streos. He was content now that he could finally prepare himself for the battle. He picked up a sword and entered the ring. No sooner had he stood inside than two Streos rushed at him, their swords raised. But Avaron held his ground, batting one away easily and blocking the blow of the second in one swipe. The general had ordered this kind of training, so that if enemies rushed them off guard, they still had a chance of winning.</p>
		<p>Another Streo joined forces with Avaron, and together, matching blow for blow, they forced the attacking Streos back. The attackers accepted defeat, and the four wiped their brows as they searched for other opponents.</p>
		<p>A sharp ringing stopped all matches. Everyone dropped their weapons in a heap and filed into a tent from which a delicious aroma wafted out.</p>
		<p>They stood in a line, as they waited for their turn at the food table. Romial and Chester joined Avaron, and the three stood at the back.</p>
		<p>They joined the table of the Streos who had just finished the obstacle race. They were still panting after the tiring exercise, but that didn’t stop them from chattering away.</p>
		<p>“When do you think we are going to be ready?” Chester whispered to his bond.</p>
		<p>“You know that we are going to fight back on the Night of Faztex, but we have a better chance if the children get back before that day.”</p>
		<p>Chester nodded, his mind immediately picturing the children.</p>
		<p>“Are you sure that they can do it?” Chester asked after a moment’s hesitation.</p>
		<p>“Never doubt them, Chester. Do not forget, they had accomplished the mission against Grinlaut in the best manner. And anyhow they do have Carra’s mother and Ron’s father with them,” Avaron reassured his bond. Chester dipped his head in agreement.</p>
		<p>A female soldier walked up to Avaron. Bending her head in greeting, she introduced herself as one of the highest ranking captains. Avaron nodded, though inwardly, he was slightly confused at the Streo’s elaborate army plan. There were soldiers, chiefs, commanders, generals, captains, and finally, the leader, all in hierarchy, though he did not know the order.</p>
		<p>“I just wanted to know the complete battle plan,” The female captain continued. Seeing the suspicious glint in Romial’s eyes, she added hastily, “So that my troops can be ready for anything.” Pausing, she stood up straight. “I need to prepare my troops for the most dangerous enemy. That is what I have got my captaincy for. I’m not the best for nothing. And I need to know exactly what to do in the battle field.” She looked at Avaron with a challenge in her eyes.</p>
		<p>Avaron just blinked in agreement. The female warrior narrowed her eyes.</p>
		<p>“I am very sorry to disappoint you, but we have no plan,” he said simply.</p>
		<p>“And maybe you should cut down on your speeches. It saves us from boredom,” Chester whispered to Romial. Romial chuckled softly but stopped when the glare that the captain was giving to Avaron turned on him.</p>
		<p>“We are yet to discuss that with your leader. We cannot tell you silly fairytales, now, can we?” Romial asked slyly.</p>
		<p>With a final glare, the female warrior stomped off.</p>
		<p>“Well, we managed to damage her pride. What does she think of herself?” Romial growled. Chester sniffed in agreement.</p>
		<p>“Do not think bad about her. She was just doing her duty,” Avaron chided.</p>
		<p>“Does that mean she can get so pompous?”</p>
		<p>“She is probably used to getting respect from everyone. She might find it tough to give respect as well.”</p>
		<p>“It does not hurt to change.”</p>
		<p>“You are right, but maybe we should give her some space. I saw her leading the troops the other day. She fights well.”</p>
		<p>“That is probably the only reason they gave her the post of ‘one of the highest ranking captains,’” Romial mimicked.</p>
		<p>Both Chester and Avaron chuckled at his excellent imitation of the haughty warrior.</p>
		<p>“But actually, she does have a point. We had better go to the leader right after lunch and discuss the plan.” Avaron said after a moment.</p>
		<p>Romial shrugged nonchalantly. Chester shook out his mane. They finished their food, and made their way to the leader’s residence.</p>
		<p>They knocked, and the door opened almost immediately. The leader stood there, wearing a grim expression. Romial looked surprised that even the leader was a battle-scarred female. He had never seen the leader before, as he had been training when Avaron and Chester first met her.</p>
		<p>She invited them inside, and Avaron introduced Romial to the leader. After that he got straight to the point. The leader thought over their words.</p>
		<p>“So it all depends on the children?” she asked. Avaron nodded, suddenly realizing how much the children carried on their shoulders.</p>
		<p>Miva remained quiet for some time. Suddenly, her eyes lighted up. She walked over to a board decorated with battle maps and plans nearby. Pulling one map out, she spread it out on the table in front of the three Ronens.</p>
		<p>“This is the battlefield near your homeland, as I remember it,” she started, pointing at the centre of the map. All the three Ronens clustered around her for a better view.</p>
		<p>“It hasn’t changed,” Avaron assured her, scrutinizing the map.</p>
		<p>She gave a quick decisive nod. “Right. This is a ditch, I believe. We can position half of our archers there. With luck, the Shadow’s army will think that the arrows are flying out of the ground.”</p>
		<p>“We can make it into a tunnel, right? If we get some warriors down there, we can probably build a tunnel and keep it standing by poles.” Chester suggested.</p>
		<p>“We’ll need some time for that,” she reminded the lion.</p>
		<p>“So what?” Chester shrugged. “I can organize a troop and lead them there. I promise they will not be harmed,” He looked challengingly at Miva. Finally she dipped her head.</p>
		<p>“We can place the other half of the archers over here. It is a high platform,” Romial suggested, pointing at the map.</p>
		<p>The leader turned her attention back to the map. “Right. And we can ambush the camp from all sides. We can hide in the undergrowth here and beyond this river right here. Chester, can you get a tunnel dug here as well? It must connect to the other tunnel which you will dig in the ditch.” Chester agreed.</p>
		<p>“I will get another one also, all around this side of the camp,” he said. “If you can afford a distraction, he will probably send his army towards that distraction. If we line up that tunnel with spears and spikes, and cover it with a net and soil, they will probably rush right into the pit, and will get speared.” Chester suggested.</p>
		<p>“Good idea. Then another group can sneak in from the other side and have them cornered. And if we manage to get some soldiers around the camp, to those low hanging trees, they can throw nets on the Shadow’s army.” Avaron said. After a moment’s thought, he added, “If we take an army of dummies, we can place them in front of the camp. The Shadow will be fooled into thinking that the army is in the front while we attack from many places. They will probably think that we outnumber them much more vastly than we actually do.”</p>
		<p>“Excellent. We will send word to the other leaders from other tribes. We will discuss it further then.” Miva put the map back where it was.</p>
		<p>“Very well.” The Ronens agreed, and left the leader’s house.</p>
		<p>“So back to training?” Romial sounded sceptical.</p>
		<p>“Yes, of course.” Avaron said, sounding tired as well.</p>
		<p>“Maybe we should get some sleep. We are all tired,” Chester pointed out. Without further argument, the three of them headed to their tents and climbed into their beds. All the three were asleep in a moment.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
