<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-013">
		<h1 class="level1-title text-center" epub:type="title">Chapter 13</h1>
		<p>“Do we have any flashlights?” Ron asked.</p>
		<p>“Doesn’t it look like we have any?” Carra snapped, pointing at the one Ruben clutched.</p>
		<p>“I meant, don’t we have more,” Ron defended himself.</p>
		<p>“Actually, I think I have some extra, if I could see what’s in my bag,” Max muttered. Ruben had switched off his flashlight by mistake, and couldn’t figure out where the switch was.</p>
		<p>“Give it to me, I can make it out,” Tabitha said. Max handed the bag over to Carra, who held it in front of her bond. Tabitha stuck her head inside the bag, shoving aside other things. A muffled mew of  joy reached them as she wriggled out of the bag, one flashlight in her jaws and pushing the rest out with her forepaws.</p>
		<p>“Well done,” Max said, smiling at where he thought the cat was. Tabitha placed her flashlight on the floor and switched it on with her paw. It shone brightly on the other five flashlights in front.</p>
		<p>“Okay. I’ll keep one, Amy, Josh, Zevyn, Iris and Lyke can take the others. Only two will be switched on at any given time. We don’t want them all running out.” Max instructed.</p>
		<p>“What was said in that rhyme? I remember some steps?” Iris asked. May pulled out the riddles from where she’d stored them in her pocket. Checking it in the light of Iris’s flashlight, she looked up.</p>
		<p>“273 steps,” she said. Iris’ eyes widened. “I counted! There were 273 rungs on that ladder. We must be on the right path!”</p>
		<p>“Good thinking,” Max nodded approvingly. “We’d better move,” Amy advised. The group inched forward.</p>
		<p>They stopped abruptly as they felt water swishing around their feet. Max’s flashlight flickered around the walls of what seemed to be a huge cavern with a tunnel leading away from both sides.</p>
		<p>“Which way?” Lyke asked.</p>
		<p>“Should I check it out?” Ruben offered. “Fine,” Max agreed. “I’ll come with you,” Pete said, joining the hawk.</p>
		<p>They waited for the two birds, their shoes and paws getting drenched in the shallow water. Tabitha jumped into Carra’s arms, flicking the water from her paws crossly.</p>
		<p>After what seemed to be an hour, but could just as well have been five minutes, the two birds emerged out of the darkness, Ruben’s flashlight focussed on the water behind the group.</p>
		<p>“What did you find?” Pal asked, before Ruben or Pete had a chance to open their beaks.</p>
		<p>“It continues along for a long way. There is water on that side as well,” Ruben said.</p>
		<p>“There are those pointy rocks from both sides, and the water gets really deep,” Pete added.</p>
		<p>“It is not running water at first,” Ruben started, but Pete cut him off, “It gets really fast later, and there’s a waterfall too! It’s damn huge, and really scary. There’s absolutely no way you can go that way.”</p>
		<p>“Then this way it is,” Max said firmly. They trudged onwards, Pal rushing forward, playing in the water. After a while, the water deepened. May had to carry Snowflake as the water reached a little above their knees. Pal enjoyed the most, as the water reached to his shoulders, and he splashed and swam, almost tripping all of them more than once.</p>
		<p>Pretty soon, stalagmites and stalactites showed up everywhere, even in the middle of the river. The group had to navigate their way slowly, being careful not to trip over an underwater or bang their head on an overhanging living rock.</p>
		<p>“Aagh!” Zevyn screamed. Everyone whirled around to find her resurfacing from the water.</p>
		<p>“What happened?” Lyke was at his sister’s side in an instant. He helped the drenched girl stand up.</p>
		<p>“I tripped over this stupid rock!” she fumed. Lyke tried to calm his short-tempered sister, so that they could move on. After a short while of travelling, Ron let out a cry of excitement.</p>
		<p>“Guys, I found something!” Pal ran over to his bond’s side, his tail wagging.</p>
		<p>“Look! There’s a secret panel over here!” Ron said, fingering a crack running down the wall.</p>
		<p>“You’re right! Should I open it?” Carra asked her mother.</p>
		<p>Amy nodded, and her daughter felt along the cracks, trying to figure out where the door was. She traced the crack in a huge square, and pushed in the centre. It creaked, but didn’t open.</p>
		<p>She looked at the others for help, and they all pushed together. It finally opened with an echoing <em>boom,</em> and a gaping hole yawned in front of them. Max shone his flashlight into the darkness. The beam illuminated a structure made of wood.</p>
		<p>“What is that?” Tabitha asked, peering in.</p>
		<p>“Is that the ferry?” Snowflake asked.</p>
		<p>“Yes! It must be!” Lyke cried.</p>
		<p>“It looks more like a ship,” Amy frowned.</p>
		<p>“I’ll go check it out,” Josh said, and climbed in as if the adults had already given him permission. He switched on his flashlight and shone it on the small ferry. Ron followed him, but the rest stayed where they were.</p>
		<p>“It is a ship, but a tiny one. And it seems to be creaky.”</p>
		<p>The two boys took their own time to check the whole ship over. It was small, and most of the paint had faded away, leaving patches of gloomy red.</p>
		<p>“Is it fine?” Snowflake asked, her voice echoing strangely.</p>
		<p>“Yeah, I think so. But I don’t know if we have to push it into that tunnel or go this way. Max, can you help?” Josh called back.</p>
		<p>“I’m coming.” Max climbed into the tunnel with the ship. He pushed past the boys and checked out the tunnel. Turning around, he asked, “May, what was the riddle about?”</p>
		<p>The girl took out the pieces of paper she had kept in her pocket. She read them out in the light of Ruben’s flashlight.</p>
		<p>“Hmm,” Amy said as May finished. “We should climb up the ship, that’s for sure. Maybe there’s a clue up there.”</p>
		<p>Ruben flew up and quickly checked around for any booby traps, just in case. When he gave the ‘all clear’ signal, the group boarded, one by one. But their unexpected weight made the ship shift its position, and it started rolling down the tunnel, leaving behind a startled Josh and Lyke, who were yet to board. They yelped in astonishment and gave chase. The ship, however, had different plans. It started gaining momentum as the tunnel sloped downwards.</p>
		<p>The two boys could hear the calls and screams of those on board as they fell back further and further. They stopped, panting.</p>
		<p>“Now what do we do?” Josh asked despairingly. He sank down in disappointment and dismay. “We can still go down the tunnel. Ruben might come back for us,” Lyke suggested hopefully. “How in the world can he possibly do that? That ship was going way too fast for a cheetah to cope with, let alone a hawk! It was probably going at like, what, five thousand metres a second? Ruben can never outpace that! It will take too damn long to reach the ship with <em>one</em> of us, let alone two!” Josh exploded. He was angrier than he had ever been. It seemed to him that he was facing failure smack in the face, after he had tried so hard.</p>
		<p>Lyke tried to be positive, forcing Josh to jog along the tunnel, but he was failing miserably and his hopes were dying. They trotted down the dark tunnel. Thankfully, both had fully functioning flashlights. The tunnel was gloomy and dark, and the two were glad they had each other’s company.</p>
		<p>Suddenly, another beam of light found their faces. Both held their hands in front of their eyes, squinting to see through the glare. A happy screech welcomed them. In a mighty thunder, Ruben the hawk swooped down to the rescue.</p>
		<p>Lyke punched Josh in an I-told-you-so manner. Josh felt his face grow hot. “I hoped I was wrong too,” he muttered sheepishly. Ruben descended, switching off his flashlight and holding it in his beak before alighting.</p>
		<p>“It is some distance to the ship. You both will walk,” Ruben said, without giving them a chance to speak.</p>
		<p>“What do you mean?” Lyke asked.</p>
		<p>“I will-”</p>
		<p>“Where is the ship?” Josh asked.</p>
		<p>“It is-”</p>
		<p>“What happened to the others?”</p>
		<p>“They are-”</p>
		<p>“Is everybody okay?”</p>
		<p>“Be quiet! The others are all fine. It is some distance away, the ship, I mean. You are going to walk. We will have rests in between,” he added, glaring at Josh who was opening his mouth to protest. He shut it quickly.</p>
		<p>“Come on then,” Ruben said, flapping his wings. He rose to the air and led the boys, forcing them to a brisk trot.</p>
		<p>They walked on for a long time.</p>
		<p>“How did the ship stop?” Josh asked.</p>
		<p>“It crashed into another ship.”</p>
		<p>“What?”</p>
		<p>“Yes. You will see for yourself soon. Now sit down. You can rest for some time.”</p>
		<p>The two boys sank to the floor in relief, trying to ease the pain in their legs. No sooner had they sat down, though, than an echoing bark reached them.</p>
		<p>“Pal!” Josh cried, though he made no move to get up.</p>
		<p>“Josh, Lyke. I’m here,” Pal called back. Now they could hear his panting and the patter of his paw steps on the rock floor. Finally he emerged from the gloom, a flashlight in his mouth.</p>
		<p>“The others were wondering where you three were. So they sent me.”</p>
		<p>“We will move now,” Ruben said firmly. Lyke sighed as he stood wearily. Josh had more energy than his friend, even though he was tired. They resumed their walk, making good time. Pal had rested for a couple of minutes, and he padded behind them. They reached the ship eventually, just as the group were making preparations to send Tabitha as well.</p>
		<p>When Ruben led the two boys to where the ship was, they could do nothing but gape at the sight they saw. The ship which the others had ridden was in pieces, completely broken. Wooden pieces lay scattered everywhere. In front of the mauled ship was another one, but magnificent. It was wooden, but painted to shine a lustrous gold, with carved designs in red and blue and green. The mast was painted black, but neither ship had any sail. Along the sides, the name <em>Beautiful Storm</em> was painted in black.</p>
		<p>“Wow,” Josh breathed. Lyke just stood there, gaping.</p>
		<p>“Come on up!” A voice called. The two tore their gazes from the ship and saw Amy waving at them. “There’s a ladder on that side.”</p>
		<p>They went round the side of the ship and saw a rope ladder dangling from the side. They glanced at each other and made a run for it. They both grabbed the sides of the ladder together, just in case even this ship left without them. Josh kept a tight grip on the ladder and then followed Lyke who had pushed past and climbed up.</p>
		<p>As they reached the top, the ship groaned and moved an inch. A frightened yelp came from down as Pal scrabbled to the ladder, placing his paws clumsily on the rope to get up. With Ruben’s help, the dog climbed the swaying ladder. A waiting Josh and Ron pulled Pal up and Ruben landed beside them. By then the ship had picked up speed and was sailing down the tunnel at full pelt.</p>
		<p>May and Iris peered over the side. The ship was suddenly on swirling black water. As May looked closer, tiny bubbles popped at the surface, and a giant monster was suddenly inches from her face. Screaming, she fell back.</p>
		<p>“What happened?” Amy asked, rushing over.</p>
		<p>“A monster!” Iris gasped, eyes wide with fear. “In the water. It jumped out.”’</p>
		<p>“Carra, tie a flashlight to the front of the ship,” Max ordered. “Pete, tie one on the rear end. We’ll take turns on the look-out. Zevyn, climb up the main mast and keep a look-out there.” Zevyn, Pete and Carra rushed to their allotted places. Max shone his flashlight on the roof of the cave. A hundred eyes glinted in the light and disappeared a second before a hurricane of flapping wings dove towards the ship.</p>
		<p>They instinctively ducked, and the flapping creatures sailed onwards. Zevyn shone her flashlight on the one beast which was still on deck. The beam of light fell on a brown creature with giant black eyes and fangs. It looked pretty much like a monkey, except for its tail, which was extremely long and suddenly fanned open, covering its face.</p>
		<p>Ron screamed. Pal barked loudly, and the creature shied away, covering its ears with its paws.</p>
		<p>“What is that thing?” Zevyn shrieked.</p>
		<p>“Calm down!” Max called out, and inched forward slowly towards the monster. It started whimpering, and curled into a perfect brown furry ball. He reached out slowly and touched it with a finger. He started stroking it, and it uncurled itself inch by inch, and lowered its tail to look at Max. He smiled at it and it crept forward. The black in its eyes shrunk like a cat’s, revealing purple eyes.</p>
		<p>“It’s cute,” May whispered, stroking the creature, which promptly climbed into her lap and grinned, folding back its fangs.</p>
		<p>“Foldable fangs?” she whispered. It spread its tail again, which revealed tiny spikes at the end. Iris reached out to touch the spikes, but the creature drew its tail back, looking annoyed.</p>
		<p>“I think the spikes are poisonous,” May interpreted the animal’s expression. The monkey like face spread into a grin.</p>
		<p>“Woah! It understands you!” Carra laughed. It started prancing around, unfurling its wings, a goofy laugh on its face. A huge splash brought them all running to one side of a ship. A gigantic horn vanished into the dark water.</p>
		<p>“What in the world?” Ron exclaimed.</p>
		<p>“This place definitely has some weird creatures.” Tabitha jumped onto the wooden side and leaned over.</p>
		<p>“Careful,” Amy cautioned. The cat leaped back onto the deck.</p>
		<p>“Come away,” Max called. Telling May and Amy to check the stock of food, he ordered the rest to go down to the cabins and check them out.</p>
		<p>As May settled down with a bag, she wondered what to name the animal on her shoulder.</p>
		<p>“How about Violet?” May asked suddenly. “What, dear?” Amy asked, looking up. “For her,” the girl pointed to the chattering animal. “Violet after her eyes,” she explained.</p>
		<p>“That’s a good name,” Amy smiled, and continued unpacking their food. Violet jumped around, as if approving her name. May turned back to her work and was shocked to find the bag empty.</p>
		<p>“Is that all?” she asked, eyes wide. Amy checked again. “We’re dangerously low,” she muttered.</p>
		<p>“Max!” she called. He turned around. “We got all the food here. We’re probably going to starve.”</p>
		<p>“That can’t possibly be all!” Max exclaimed. There were three cans of tinned food, two packs of chips and some sandwiches. Max groaned.</p>
		<p>“What’s up?” Carra asked from the front of the ship. She glanced at the food lying on the deck. “Where’s the rest of it?”</p>
		<p>“That’s all there is,” Amy said sadly.</p>
		<p>“Maybe we can find something ‘round here.”</p>
		<p>Amy shrugged. Violet widened her eyes and danced around waving frantically. They looked at where she was pointing and saw a faint outline.</p>
		<p>“Land! There’s land up ahead! I can see it!” Zevyn called out shrilly.</p>
		<p>“Clever girl!” May smiled, picking up Violet.</p>
		<p>Meanwhile, down in the cabins, Tabitha and Pal had smelled something and had led their group to it.</p>
		<p>“What is it?” Ron asked for the third time. “I can’t make out.” Pal sniffed the air some more before following the trail. “It kind of smells like books and bombs rolled in one.”</p>
		<p>“Okaay.” Ron looked around nervously.</p>
		<p>Tabitha picked up a stronger scent and followed it to a table. She went over to the side and vanished!</p>
		<p>“T-Tabitha?” Ron called. No reply.</p>
		<p>Lyke strode to where the cat had been and inspected it. “She didn’t vanish, Ron. She went through this hole here.” Lyke pointed to a hole in the wall. Without further hesitation, Lyke disappeared through it too. Exchanging worried glances, Ron and his bond crawled through the hole.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
