<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-014">
		<h1 class="level1-title text-center" epub:type="title">Chapter 14</h1>
		<p>Josh emptied the dusty bag he had found in a compartment. The cabin they were searching was full of bags and ‘something like suitcases’, according to Josh.</p>
		<p>“Same as last. Bits of metal and scrap. Nothing more,” he announced. Iris sighed. “I do not think that there is anything useful here. Where is Snow?”</p>
		<p>“I’m here.” A dusty bunny popped out from behind a chair. She shook out her fur. “There’s nothing but cardboard back there.”</p>
		<p>“I doubt there is anything more we can do here,” Ruben announced, unfurling his wings. His wings brushed against a set of boxes balancing precariously on top of each other. The boxes tumbled down from the table they were on, burying Snowflake underneath. The bunny shook the boxes off grumpily and looked at the others. They were all staring at what had been underneath the boxes.</p>
		<p>“It can’t be!” Josh cried. On the table was a glass case. Inside the case, a miniature Ron, Lyke, Pal and Tabitha were pounding the glass, screaming. They stopped, eyes wide in amazement when the saw the humungous Josh looming over the glass.</p>
		<p>“What in the world happened?” Snowflake whispered. Iris leaned forward, touching the glass case with a finger. Pal placed his paw on the same spot on his side. Iris’ finger was a bit bigger than Pal’s paw.</p>
		<p>“Fetch Max,” she ordered. Ruben shot out of the room and flew up. As he flew out, May picked up the monkey creature and smiled, “Clever girl.”</p>
		<p>“Max!” he screeched. The man turned around, surprised. “What is it?” he asked, frowning at the hawk’s worried expression.</p>
		<p>“Come and see for yourself.” Ruben led Max down to the cabin, Zevyn and Carra following. They entered the cabin, bewildered expressions on their faces. Max gasped when he saw his son in the glass case. Zevyn let out a strangled cry, while Carra stared at her bond in her horror.</p>
		<p>“What the hell happened?” Carra asked softly, not able to believe what she saw.</p>
		<p>“Right. How did you end up here?” Max asked Ron. The tiny boy spoke, but it was very soft, and no-one could hear it. Max sighed and looked down at his feet. A knocking sound made him look up. Ron was beckoning him closer. Max placed his ear on the glass, and Ron related their story in his loudest voice.</p>
		<p>Max nodded. He turned to the others. “Ron says that Tabitha and Pal found a scent trail and followed it. There was a table behind which the smell was coming from, and these four followed it there. There was an opening there, I believe, and they crawled through. But there was a hole on the other side, and they fell through and ended up here. I don’t know what to do now.” Max looked more worried than he had ever been.</p>
		<p>“Can’t they go back the way they came?” Zevyn glanced down at her brother. He shrugged. Turning around, he knocked the glass on the other side from which they popped through.</p>
		<p>A sudden <em>crack</em> and the glass fell open. Lyke looked at it in shock. Ron ran to his side, his bond and Tabitha following. The two tiny boys looked at their giant comrades. What should they do?</p>
		<p>Pal pattered up to the side and peeped down. There was floor under it, not a hole. “Should we jump? What if there’s an invisible portal and we’ll go back to our proper size?” he asked. Lyke shrugged.</p>
		<p>“I think we should try it,” Tabitha said, determined. “If it doesn’t work, we’ll just fall down right? What’s the harm? We could ask them to put something soft, just in case.”</p>
		<p>Ron nodded. “We should try it.” Lyke went to the opposite glass and shouted to Zevyn and told her their plans. She nodded, worried, and relayed the message to the others. They started searching, while Snowflake went up to call the others down. Soon, Carra had found a soft Styrofoam sheet and pulled it in front of the open glass.</p>
		<p>Nodding gratefully at the girl, Lyke prepared himself. The others watched tersely. He took a deep breath, made a running start, and jumped. Midway down to the ground, he disappeared.</p>
		<p>“Lyke?” Ron called anxiously. Snowflake suddenly turned around, pricking her ears. Thudding of footsteps? How? They were all in this room! Suddenly, Lyke burst through the door, his normal size.</p>
		<p>“Lykenzar!” Zevyn cried, hugging her brother.</p>
		<p>“It works!” Max laughed. They turned back to the glass. Ron was already running. He leaped, disappeared. Pal and Tabitha jumped together, and vanished. Moments later, they were all in the room, talking, laughing and crying all at once.</p>
		<p>Celebrating, they went to the deck. As soon as they reached, they fell to their knees. The ship groaned and hit something hard again, and stopped shaking. When they saw what the ship had hit, they were all on their feet in an instant and climbing off it. They had reached the land.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
