<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-015">
		<h1 class="level1-title text-center" epub:type="title">Chapter 15</h1>
		<p>“This is our plan. Does anybody object or have a question or opinion?” the Streo leader asked the council. Avaron looked around. Nobody objected. They had called a meeting of all the leaders they knew to form an alliance against The Shadow.</p>
		<p>“I think we could use some of our people for a tactical advantage.” A young leader stood up.</p>
		<p>“Well, enlighten us,” Romial said impatiently.</p>
		<p>He took out the battle map and explained his view. Soon, there were smiles on everyone’s faces, and they were all nodding in agreement.</p>
		<p>“That’s a good plan. You’ll make a very intelligent ruler soon,” Avaron congratulated him. He smiled shyly and sat down again. Miva concluded that the meeting was over, and all the leaders dispersed.</p>
		<p>“We’d better get back to training now,” Avaron decided, and the three Ronens went to the training centre. Word had already spread about the new plan, and the troops were undergoing the slightly different training.</p>
		<p>They had shifted base to a much bigger clearing which could accommodate all the ally’s troops. Now the clearing was completely packed, with creatures of every shape and size training and battling in various ways.</p>
		<p>A legion of winged creatures rose to the air at a sharp call. They were the Veria. They avoided mock arrows, twisting and manoeuvring in the sky easily, pausing to spit fire of their own. Down below, Chester was leading a group of huge handed troll-like figures, the Musker, to dig the tunnels. Storin, king of the Xasfi, strode over to Avaron. The Xasfi were hairy two headed beasts with spikes down their backs, known for using their strong tails for constricting their enemies.</p>
		<p>“Avaron, tomorrow isss Xassshi day. We celebrate it imppportantly. Asss your equal, I am asssking your permissssion for celebrasssion,” he hissed in a strange accent. Avaron agreed, assuring Storin that he would discuss with the other leaders and notify the king later. Storin went back to training his people, his extra long tail snaking around the path.</p>
		<p>Avaron decided to get the job over with and called all the leaders for a meeting. When they joined him, he informed them of Storin’s request. Agreeing that the soldiers needed a feast, they all agreed, and sent word to the cooks of all species.</p>
		<p>The Xasfi did excellent in the training after the feast was announced. Avaron realized that they had been looking forward for this for so long, and it motivated them to train much better. Even the others performed better than they used to.</p>
		<p>As night fell, they winded up and started setting up the camps. They built a huge fire in the middle and positioned the camps in a ring around it, with the exception of the Tsist, who preferred to sleep in the high branches of the trees.</p>
		<p>While Avaron set up his tent with Romial, he wondered where his bond was. Chester had not returned yet, and Avaron, for the first time, worried if his bond could manage the Musker. He looked up, scanning the surroundings, when suddenly, Chester’s illuminated form appeared on the crest of a slope. He ran down with the Musker on his tail. All of them were baked in earth, and sand and grit flew off them as they entered the clearing.</p>
		<p>Miva hurried out of her tent, closely followed by the others. “What is the news?”</p>
		<p>“We dug a tunnel and shored it up. The roof seems to be a little unstable, but tomorrow, we can fix it. Hopefully, there will be no cave-ins.”</p>
		<p>Miva and the others nodded. “Well done,” Avaron congratulated. The lion shook out his fur, sending grit and soil flying. Avaron looked up. Quirodon was already in the sky, while Satiro peeked out from behind distant mountains.</p>
		<p>The Ronen leader returned to his tent with his bond and Romial. The next day, a Veria and Hikint had been sent as messengers to the Streo campsite. Chester led the Musker out again, all of them determined. Some pulled carts full of timber and tools to shore up the tunnels, while others carried sacks of food for lunch. The feast was to be for dinner.</p>
		<p>A drum started beating and the training started for the day. The Veria dove and swooped in the air with screeches, avoiding arrows from the best professional Streos, and when given the chance, the armoured beasts returned fire with fire. Avaron watched the way they moved gracefully through the air even with the metal protection they were supposed to wear against the arrows.</p>
		<p>The Tsist crept silently through the trees, not making a sound. Not even a leaf stirred to give away their presence. Below the eaves of the trees, several Hikints and Xasfi looked above them suspiciously, trying to figure out where their attackers were hiding. Even from his vantage point of view above the hill, where he could see through the branches clearly, Avaron could not point out where the Tsist lurked. A branch swished, and the Tsist dropped on the troops below. Their scaly jade skin was a blur as they pushed the defender’s heads to the grounds with their four clawed hands. The defenders fought back fiercely, managing to throw off some Tsist. The Hikints jabbed the Tsist with sticks, while the Xasfi spat and coiled their lengthy tails around their waists.</p>
		<p>Romial was sparring with a couple of Makix, who were just as skilled as the Ronen, with their horned heads and huge lower canines, which jutted out of their jaw as deadly tusks. Their sheer size and protective, hard scales, added with their razor-sharp claws, made them a deadly enemy. They were short tempered, not very unlike the Musker, which made both of them all the more dangerous. The Hikints, Streos and Veria, on the other hand, were very long tempered, but fought with fatal precision. The Xasfi and Tsist fought on their instincts, and played with their enemies before moving in for the kill.</p>
		<p>Avaron gazed at the scene once more, and climbed down the hill. He knew he should be training, but he didn’t feel like it. He was too preoccupied in his thoughts to notice Romial backing away in defeat from the two Makix. Romial turned around and just managed to avoid crashing into his leader.</p>
		<p>“Avaron? What is wrong?” he asked. The Ronen leader turned around with a start. He shook his head. “Nothing, my friend. I was just thinking about Iris and the others.”</p>
		<p>“Why do you not try battling with them?” Romial nodded towards the two Makix. “You will forget your troubles for a while.” He led his leader towards the two warriors and they stood, ready to attack. The Makix charged, heads lowered. The two Ronens yelled a battle cry and raised their swords, ready to meet their attackers. The Makix swerved aside at the last instant, but the Ronens swerved around, fast as a snake, and clashed their swords against the sharp tusks. The Ronens seemed to be gaining ground, but one Makix yanked his head up, sending a surprised Avaron flying. He hadn’t expected the opponent to be that strong! Defeating Romial then was easy, and the two Ronens graciously accepted defeat.</p>
		<p>“Lesson learned number one; never underestimate your enemy,” Avaron muttered, rubbing his arm. He had landed awkwardly on it when he was thrown away. Now the Makix walked up to him, bowing, apologized profusely. Avaron forgave him readily with a smile, and praised him for his skills.</p>
		<p>The day wore on, and as night approached, everyone ceased fighting as they eagerly waited for the feast. The moons rose, and everything was set up. Laughing, talking and drinking, the feast continued for a better part of the night, and even the moons seemed to be enjoying themselves, shining brightly, illuminating the whole clearing.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
