<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-017">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Chapter 17</h1>
		<p>“Run,” Iris breathed, but neither could move. The giant serpent slithered closer, its tongue flicking out. The others turned around. </p>
		<p>“Hey, what’s the hold up?” Amy called from the front. The serpent had transfixed them with its amber gaze, not letting them move a muscle. Ron grabbed his cousin’s hand, about to pull her forward when he saw the giant snake. He screamed and bolted, not looking back. </p>
		<p>“Snake! Snake!” he shrieked in everyone’s confused faces. Josh joined Iris and Carra. The serpent was coming closer, closer slowly, flicking its tongue in and out, its fiery eyes not once leaving the two girls. Josh gave one glance at the serpent, and stood stock-still. </p>
		<p>The serpent rounded the corner and fixed the rest of the group with its fiery eyes. Everyone’s eyes widened visibly, but they too, could not move.</p>
		<p>“Ssso you are the lotusss ssseekersss,” it hissed, coiling itself around the terrified group. “Don’t fear me, I only wisshh you well.” Nobody made a sound. The snake let out a huge breath through its nostrils, a sigh. It uncoiled itself from them and drew back a little. </p>
		<p>“I am going to test you a little, then we sshall have introducctionsss.” The serpent seemed to smirk. “We’ll play a little game firssst. Come.” With that, it slithered away, the tip of its tail coiling around the group, forcing them to a slow trot. </p>
		<p>They reached a big room, which seemed impossible since the temple seemed so small from outside. The snake stopped and fixed its amber gaze on them again. </p>
		<p>“Reach that,” it pointed at a shiny object stuck in the ceiling, “without getting eaten. The birds should stay on the ground.” It disappeared, leaving the group very confused. “Without getting eaten?” Ron asked, frowning. </p>
		<p>“That’s easy. Violet can get it for us, while we protect her,” May said. Violet seemed to agree, and her little face turned to a grin. The creature scampered to the nearest wall and began to climb very swiftly. </p>
		<p>The wall behind them shifted, and many huge spiders rushed out of the crevice. Ron shrieked, no surprise. The brown creatures scurried towards the group, jaws drooling. A couple veered off to the side to intercept a screeching Violet. </p>
		<p>“How the hell are we supposed to fight them? We don’t have any weapons!” Josh protested. As if on cue, a bunch of weapons landed with a <em>thump</em> beyond the mega-spiders.</p>
		<p>“Just great,” Carra muttered. “Pete, Ruben!” Max ordered. “The snake said they have to stay on the ground!” Amy cried. “They are not getting the weapons,” Iris said, catching on. “They are going to distract the spiders.”</p>
		<p>The two birds spread their wings, catching the spiders’ attention. Most of them stepped on each other to surround the birds. “Zevyn, now!” Lyke bent over. Zevyn jumped on her brother’s back, easily catapulting over the remaining spider’s heads, and landed right next to the weapons. She quickly dealt them out, throwing them over the mega-spiders. A couple of swords, twin blades, a double-headed battle axe, three rapiers, a bow and a quiver full of arrows landed right next to Ron. Zevyn had kept a sword for herself, and slicing off the head of a spider, she pushed off its back and landed on her feet beside her brother. </p>
		<p>Tabitha and Iris broke ranks to help Violet. They took out the two spiders which were chasing Violet, and she continued scaling the wall. </p>
		<p>“Violet! We can’t hold them off for long!” May yelled, shooting an arrow from the bow. The monkey creature nodded in understanding and sped up. She swung herself up the last couple metres and grabbed the shiny object. The spiders stopped in their tracks and seemed to literally melt into the floor. The dead bodies disintegrated into sand, which vanished after a moment. </p>
		<p>Violet scampered down the wall, holding out the object. Amy took it from the creature, and held it to the light from a skylight, gasping. </p>
		<p>“It’s a... lotus!” </p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
