<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-019">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Chapter 19</h1>
		<p>“Come quickly!” Ruben called, flying ahead. Lyke, Iris and Zevyn ran behind the hawk, stumbling over the undergrowth in their haste. They had crossed the log from the island, and were now racing across the forest on the other shore. </p>
		<p>Ruben slowed down as he reached the ship. The three children halted panting for breath. </p>
		<p>“So how do we get back now?” Lyke asked, once they had rested for a few moments. Iris eyed the lotus, staring at it fiercely as if sheer determination will automatically transport them back. It happened much differently though. </p>
		<p>Zevyn and Ruben went down to the ship to check out if there was anything useful. As they groped around, Zevyn chanced upon the glass box in which her miniature brother had been trapped. Grabbing it, the girl tried to walk out, almost falling over due to its weight. Ruben offered to help, which she gratefully accepted. They hauled it over to where Lyke and Iris were waiting. They managed to place it as gently as they could; in this case, with a loud <em>thud</em> that could have scared off birds from trees, had there been birds or trees so close to the shore. </p>
		<p>“Maybe you should learn to place things more softly,” Lyke suggested, wincing visibly when his sister dropped the box. </p>
		<p>“Then maybe you could have been of some help, instead of dreaming around!” the shorter girl snapped. Lyke held up his hands, surrendering, while Zevyn smirked. </p>
		<p>Iris wandered around the glass box, running her hands over it. She stopped suddenly, fingering one side. <br />“Look at this. I think there is something here,” she beckoned to the others. Zevyn felt the side of the glass box. “You’re right.” she nodded. “There’s something written here.” She traced the letters. “It’s in Sanskrit.”</p>
		<p>“Can you read it?” Ruben asked hopefully. The girl nodded, flipping back her hair and kneeling down. </p>
		<p>She muttered something to herself, then looked up. “It’s the way to get back,” she announced, grinning. “Really? What do we do?” Lyke asked, almost jumping up and down in excitement. His hair shimmered with lightning, and he stopped, puzzled. </p>
		<p>“I thought Minkin took away our special powers,” he mumbled. Zevyn’s eyes grew wide as her ears became cat-like, and her green wings grew back. </p>
		<p>“What in the world is going on?” Lyke asked, his newly grown tail dragging on the ground. </p>
		<p>“We are right next to the portal. Maybe that is why you are changing back to normal,” Ruben suggested. Zevyn laughed. “I don’t care, I got my wings back!” </p>
		<p>“We had better go back as soon as we can,” Iris warned. “Yeah,” Zevyn agreed, and translated the words on the box. “We have to walk through the box,” she started. Iris frowned. “How do we do that?” The shorter girl shrugged. “It just says so. After we fix the lotus there,” she pointed to a little dent on the box, “And we’ll be back on Imagneus.” </p>
		<p>“But what about the others?” Ruben asked. “We’ll probably have to ask Avaron to get them back after the war. But till then, I’m afraid they’re out of action.” </p>
		<p>“You mean, we just leave them there with that horrible snake?” Lyke asked, shocked. “There’s no other way, Lykenzar.” Zevyn’s huge cat eyes showed that she was feeling miserable about leaving them behind. </p>
		<p>“We cannot just do that!” Iris exclaimed, horrified. “All of them knew that all of us couldn’t escape. That’s why Ron distracted that snake, didn’t he? We will find a way to get them back,” Zevyn’s eyes filled with determination.</p>
		<p>“Come on then,” Lyke said, hesitantly taking the lotus from Iris. He found the groove and slowly pushed the lotus into place. Nothing happened. </p>
		<p>“And now we’re supposed to just walk through?” He asked sarcastically. “What, don’t you believe your own sister?” Zevyn shot back. With a glare, she stormed through the box, which provided no resistance at all. The moment she was completely inside, she vanished into thin air. </p>
		<p>Lyke wasted no time in following his sibling. Iris exchanged a glance with her bond. “Father told us that he needs the lotus to defeat the Shadow. How are we going to get it if we need it to get back?” Iris asked, frowning. </p>
		<p>“Maybe it was like a switch. You need to place it once, and the portal will remain open for some time, so you can remove it.” </p>
		<p>Iris nodded. “Maybe you are right. Good thinking.” She removed the lotus from its place and walked in. She disappeared with the lotus. Ruben nodded in satisfaction and followed. </p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>The four found themselves in an unfamiliar landscape. </p>
		<p>“Where did we end up?” Lyke asked, swishing his tail. They couldn’t see; it was completely dark. None of the three moons were visible, either they hadn’t risen, or they were blocked.</p>
		<p>“Weird,” Zevyn muttered. She could see just fine, due to her cat eyes.</p>
		<p>Lyke closed his eyes, and a few seconds later, several bolts of lightning rose from his hands, formed a single sphere of light, and lit up their surroundings. </p>
		<p>They were completely surrounded by trees and bushes, with no way through. Ruben tried to fly up, but the branches of the trees crowded above them, blocking any way of flying. </p>
		<p>They started moving forward, pushing through the undergrowth. Ruben growled as twigs and leaves and dirt stuck on to his feathers. Zevyn seemed uncomfortable to walk now that she got her wings back, but she didn’t complain. </p>
		<p>The lightning sphere formed dancing shadows all along their path, leading them to believe that there was twice the number of obstacles on the ground than there actually was. They kept trying to avoid imaginary stones and ended up tripping over real ones. </p>
		<p>“Can’t you make your sphere brighter?” Iris snapped when she stumbled for the infinitieth time. Zevyn, the only one who hadn’t tripped even once due to her special sight, replied. “It has been some time since he used his lightning. He needs time to get used to it, and energy too. If he makes it brighter, he’ll lose all his energy, and we’ll have to carry him.” She ended with a shudder. “I <em>definitely </em>do not want that.”</p>
		<p>Lyke laughed, and that merry sound seemed very out of place in the dark forest. Yet, it lightened their mood slightly. Suddenly, Lyke stopped, his tail swishing from side to side slowly. His hair buzzed with electricity as he motioned the others to stay where they were. Zevyn inched closer though, pricking her ears in an attempt to hear better. Lyke moved aside to let his sister pass. </p>
		<p>“What is it?” Ruben whispered from the back. “Something’s there,” Zevyn whispered back, flattening her ears. Suddenly something exploded from the bushes ahead, and Zevyn leaped forward to meet it. They crashed mid-air, and grappled with each other. The other creature had jade skin, and four arms and sharp needle teeth which it snapped at Zevyn’s head.</p>
		<p>“It’s a Tsist!” Iris widened her eyes. The Tsist flung Zevyn away, who landed on her feet. She glared up at the creature, but its attention was fixed on Iris. </p>
		<p>“Avaron’s daughter, aren’t you?” It clacked its teeth. She nodded confidently. The Tsist’s expression changed immediately. “Finally, you returned! Where are the others?” </p>
		<p>Iris looked away. “We had to leave them behind,” Ruben explained. The Tsist’s brown eyes widened. “Well, you can explain later,” he said, but disbelief was evident in his voice. “My name is Dejkis. Call me Dej. I’ll take you to Avaron.” He turned around and vanished. </p>
		<p>Dej led them to a huge clearing, which was packed with creatures of all kinds. Small settlements had been established in one side, while a training arena was made in another corner. Many were training, while some were moving out of the clearing. </p>
		<p>Dej took them to the training area. Iris gasped as she noticed a familiar figure. </p>
		<p>“Father!” she cried. Avaron turned sharply, and his opponent beat him. Avaron pushed him off and rushed to his daughter, a beaming smile on his face. </p>
		<p>His initial enthusiasm faded when he saw only Lyke, Zevyn and Ruben with his daughter. He frowned. “Where are the others? And where is the lotus?” </p>
		<p>Iris handed over the lotus to her father, but didn’t answer his first question.</p>
		<p>“Where are the others?” He repeated. Iris looked away, unable to meet her father’s brilliant green gaze. </p>
		<p>It was Ruben who answered. “The Lotus Guardian did not let us go. Ron distracted it and we managed to escape. They are still with that monster.” he spat. Avaron didn’t comment. </p>
		<p>“What is your plan? When is the battle?” Lyke asked. </p>
		<p>Avaron looked around at the cluster of various creatures and sighed. </p>
		<p>“The battle is on the Night of Faztex. I will take you to the other leaders, they will tell you about the battle.” He turned around and walked away, glancing back once. Iris followed her father with Ruben right behind her, and after a moment’s hesitation, Lyke and Zevyn followed.</p>
		<p>Avaron led them to a little crowded tent and ducked inside. They entered, and realized that all eyes were on them. Lyke shifted uncomfortably, pushing his much more confident sister in front of him.</p>
		<p>Iris pushed past the siblings and joined her father at a table. Zevyn, Lyke and Ruben sat next to Iris and Avaron. </p>
		<p>“Do you have the lotus?” A Streo asked them as soon as they sat down. </p>
		<p>“Yes, Miva, they brought it,” Avaron replied for them, handing over the lotus to the Streo. She inspected it, turning it over in her hands. After a moment of silence, she turned to the children.</p>
		<p>“Well done, all of you. I, actually all of us doubted you, but you have proven that you are much more than capable of completing dangerous tasks.” She smiled at them.</p>
		<p>“But Avarron sssaid there were more off you,” a Xasfi said, looking at them intently from clear green eyes. </p>
		<p>“Yes, Storin, but the Lotus Guardian did not let them leave, they distracted it, and Iris, Ruben, Lyke and Zevyn escaped.”</p>
		<p>“So the rest of them are still stuck on Earth?” </p>
		<p>Avaron nodded, sighing. The leaders exchanged worried glances. </p>
		<p>“The Lotus Guardian is said to be very selfish. I guess it is not such a surprise that it used them to its own personal interests,” the Veria leader said. </p>
		<p>Iris shook her head. “We have to get them back,” she argued. </p>
		<p>“Yeah, we have to save them. Ron’s father and Carra’s mother too,” Lyke agreed.</p>
		<p>“Of course we will save them. But we cannot spare time before the battle. And if we lose against the Shadow, they will be better off on Earth,” Avaron muttered darkly. </p>
		<p>“We will <em>not</em> lose. We will defeat the Shadow of Death and destroy him once for all,” Miva declared firmly. Everyone looked away, as if Miva’s words didn’t hit as close to home as she had expected. </p>
		<p>“So what is the plan?” Zevyn asked finally.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
