<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-020">
		<h1 class="level1-title text-center" epub:type="title">Chapter 20</h1>
		<p>“Today is the day we will fight the Shadow! We will take back what was rightfully ours!” Avaron cried.</p>
		<p>It was the day of the Night of Faztex. Everyone had assembled after one last time of training. The non-warriors of each tribe were also busy, making dummy warriors, sharpening blades, preparing last minute medicines for the healers.</p>
		<p>“Chester, Scythor,” Avaron said, addressing his bond and the Musker leader. “The tunnels are safe?” The lion and the Musker nodded.</p>
		<p>“Good. Are the dummies ready?”</p>
		<p>“Yes. We have to only place them for the battle.”</p>
		<p>“Well done. For victory!” he screamed. Everyone chorused, “For victory!”</p>
		<p>“What about us, Father?” Iris asked, approaching Avaron after his speech.</p>
		<p>“Hmm?” He looked at his daughter, tension apparent on his face.</p>
		<p>“What are we going to do during the fight?” Iris asked again, glancing at her bond, Zevyn and Lyke.</p>
		<p>“You four will be responsible for rescuing the Ronens while we distract The Shadow of Death. You will stay together and bring everyone to this clearing. No Ronen will be expected to fight. They will be treated and fed here, and you will <em>not</em> leave their side, understood?” Avaron looked sternly at Lyke, who nodded, subdued. “Okay, good.” With that, the Ronen leader left with Romial. Chester touched Iris’ shoulder with his tail in a friendly farewell, and padded after his bond.</p>
		<p>“Are you ready?” Iris asked. “Hell, yeah.” Zevyn said, smiling slyly. Lyke just nodded, still feeling disappointed that he would not be participating in the battle. Ruben let out a loud screech, then laughed. “Of course I am ready!”</p>
		<p>Iris shot her bond a warm glance, then shook her head and hugged him.</p>
		<p>“Let’s do this.” Zevyn spread out her wings and soared upwards. Lyke frowned up at his sister. “We can’t all fly, you know.”</p>
		<p>“Why are you so miserable?” she asked, landing next to her brother.</p>
		<p>“I can’t fight in the battle,” he muttered grouchily.</p>
		<p>“When we are rescuing the Ronens, we will encounter guards. The Shadow is not so stupid that he will leave his prisoners unguarded. We will leave all of them for you to practice your nonexistent battle skills,” Ruben laughed cheerfully. Lyke’s face brightened up considerably, not even seeming to have heard Ruben’s last sentence.</p>
		<p>“Great!” Zevyn rolled her eyes. “Come on, battle lover.” Lyke, apparently pleased with his new nickname, followed his sister in high spirits. Ruben and Iris exchanged amused glances and trailed behind the siblings.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
		<p>“How much longer?” Zevyn asked, fidgeting impatiently. Iris glanced exasperatedly at her. “Avaron will give the signal when everyone is ready,” she said, turning back to the scene in front of her. Iris, Zevyn and Lyke were crouched in the branches of trees, waiting for Avaron’s signal; the piercing screech of a Veria. Ruben was perched comfortably on a branch above their heads, preening himself.</p>
		<p>Zevyn grumbled and tried to shift her position, but an ominous crack made her freeze. Her catlike eyes widened, but the screech of a Veria drowned out the sound of the branch breaking. The three of them tumbled to the ground, but Lyke was the only one who landed. Zevyn unfurled her wings and flew back to the tree, while Ruben saved his bond and carried her to safety. Fortunately though, Lyke fell right on top of a couple of the Shadow’s minions who were passing by.</p>
		<p>With a smile of grim satisfaction, Lyke successfully knocked both of them out. “All clear!” he called, looking up at his companions.</p>
		<p>“Great,” Iris smiled, landing nimbly on her feet. Zevyn swooped down, her face blank. Ruben remained in the air, looking around for danger.</p>
		<p>“Three enemies from the west, two from north!” he called out. “I will handle those two, you take out the rest.” With that, he flapped his wings and glided swiftly away. Iris, Zevyn and Lyke immediately faced west, and spotted the three henchmen.</p>
		<p>With a loud cry, the three minions launched themselves in the air, and in a flash, one of them was on the ground, groaning in pain. Zevyn stood over him, her eyes glinting dangerously. A kick to his head silenced his cries. Behind her, Lyke had already dealt with both of them, the two bodies vibrating as electricity passed through them. He turned around to find Iris already jogging away, beckoning to them to join her.</p>
		<p>A swoosh of wind signalled Ruben’s arrival. “The coast is clear for now. The camp is completely overrun. We underestimated the Shadow’s numbers. There are too many enemies left behind for us to handle,” he stated plainly.</p>
		<p>“Then we use stealth.” Iris sounded determined. Zevyn nodded.</p>
		<p>“What’s the position?” Lyke asked. Ruben swooped up for a quick check, and landed beside them again.</p>
		<p>“Two right in front. About three score in the camp. Two on the back and two on each side. The camp has been changed, <em>again</em>, and there is a huge pole in the middle. All the Ronens are chained to it.”</p>
		<p>“Why don’t they just shift?” Zevyn asked curiously.</p>
		<p>Iris shook her head. “Ronens have to be healthy to be able to shift. It is one of the downs of shifting.”</p>
		<p>“The Ronens have been tortured.” Ruben shook his head. “There’s no sign of any of the bonds.”</p>
		<p>“What?”</p>
		<p>“I cannot see them.”</p>
		<p>“Those vermin have probably hidden them somewhere.”</p>
		<p>“So what’s the plan?”</p>
		<p>“You guys free the Ronens, I’ll take out all the guards.”</p>
		<p>“Don’t be stupid, Lyke. There are sixty guards in camp. There’s no way you can take them all out, even with your lightning.”</p>
		<p>“But the element of surprise is the most important part in a battle,” Lyke argued. “I can use lightning to knock out at least a quarter of them there, and they won’t even know what hit them!”</p>
		<p>“I agree, Lyke, but let one of us help you,” Iris said patiently.</p>
		<p>“Okay, okay,” Lyke muttered. “Zevyn, you’re up.” His sister nodded. “Sure.”</p>
		<p>Lyke closed his eyes, summoning lightning from the skies.</p>
		<p>“He could produce lightning on his own, could he not?” Ruben asked curiously. “His lightning is not powerful enough for mass scale destruction,” Zevyn said, watching as her brother gathered storm clouds in the sky above. Soon, the air was crackling with the intensity of electricity. The Death Lord’s minions were becoming unsettled and nervous, making them irritable. In a moment, a fight had already broken out between the soldiers.</p>
		<p>Lyke turned to his friends, gave a beaming smile, and drew lightning from the stormy skies. Once it touched his hands, he lit up and rose a few feet above the ground. Opening his eyes determinedly, he sent the lightning surging towards the Ronen camp, controlling the bolts with his mind. Zevyn launched herself into the air the same instant, her wings sending strong gusts of wind in every direction.</p>
		<p>The enemy soldiers scattered in every direction, completely forgetting their training. Lyke’s lightning zapped out two dozen sentries, while Zevyn’s wind blew away at least one score. The rest fled, but suddenly seemed to regain control and positioned themselves in a tactical battle formation.</p>
		<p>Zevyn cursed. “What’s wrong?” Lyke called. Zevyn quickly ducked to avoid being hit by a shower of arrows before replying. “They have a stupid smart general! They are standing in between all the prisoners, so there’s no way you can take them out without risking the Ronens’ lives.”</p>
		<p>“Then we draw them to us.” Lyke said, throwing a bolt of lightning straight at the pole. It made an ominous <em>clang</em> on impact, but the pole didn’t melt, as Lyke had expected it to. Instead, the bolts got deflected, aiming straight at Lyke. Everyone ducked, including the guards, and Zevyn took her chance, barrelling into one of the guards, killing him instantly.</p>
		<p>The Ronens, who were watching all the while, regained hope and started struggling against the chains around their wrists.</p>
		<p>“The keys! The ugly one in front of Ivy has the keys!” a voice rang out. Zevyn turned to see it was Leif who had spoken. The girl nodded swiftly and dived towards the one Leif had mentioned. <em>He is obviously the General, or he wouldn’t have </em><em>been trusted with the keys</em>, Zevyn reasoned with herself, <em>which </em><em>means that he commands all these stupid creatures. </em></p>
		<p>“Lyke!” she called, soaring upwards. Lyke ran into the clearing on thunderbolts, rising higher with each step he took. He nodded to his sister when they were parallel. They split up, and the General, obviously thinking Lyke was more dangerous, kept a look-out on the boy, sending some of his soldiers after Zevyn.</p>
		<p>The winged girl led the soldiers into the nearby forest where she quickly disposed of them. Feigning injuries, she dragged herself out into the clearing, in full view of the General.</p>
		<p>“Zevyn, get back!” She heard Lyke scream as the General chuckled evilly. But the boy did nothing to save her, knowing full well that it was only an act to buy time and get rid of more minions. The Ugly General ordered some soldiers to finish her off. Faking a look of terror, she waited until they were on her, then suddenly she kicked out with her wings, the force of it sending all of them flying. Moving quickly, she killed all of them. The Ugly General’s face had turned from gleeful triumph to a growing horror. Zevyn faced him now, her eyes cold and daunting. When he was distracted, Lyke ran down on his lightning to stand right behind the General and with a swift kick, sent him sprawling, away from the Ronens.</p>
		<p>Picking up the key from the General’s pocket he tossed it into the air. In a second, it was in Ruben’s grip, who was already flying towards Iris. The two immediately set on rescuing the Ronens, while Lyke and Zevyn finished off the rest of the soldiers.</p>
		<p>“Where are the animals?” Ruben asked Ivy as soon as she was free. “Come with me, I will take you,” she said and jogged as fast as her starving body allowed her to. She halted and stamped on a certain patch of earth, and it gave way, revealing an underground entrance.</p>
		<p>“When did they do this?” Zevyn asked, standing behind Ruben. “They have not been idle ever since they seized the camp.”</p>
		<p>“Okay, I’m going in,” Zevyn said and ran down the flight of stairs. Iris immediately followed, but not without giving her sister a small hug first. It was very smelly in the underground cellar. Pretty soon, they found row upon row of cages, inside which all the animals had been locked up. Setting to work immediately, Zevyn had already opened two cages with her cat claws before realizing that Iris was still standing where she had left her.</p>
		<p>“What’s the matter?” “I cannot see like you, Zevyn. Have you forgotten?” Iris replied, raising an eyebrow. “Oh, here,” Zevyn handed her friend a wooden torch she found. “How do I light it?” Iris asked, touching the torch. Zevyn sighed, and asked one of the free animals to fetch Lykenzar.</p>
		<p>The boy came down and lit up the torch. Iris started to free the bonds with the key, while Zevyn resumed using her claws. After a few minutes of unlocking, all the animals were in the light once again.</p>
		<p>“Where is the battle taking place?” Leif demanded once the last of the animals were out. “Umm, we’re supposed to be taking you to the clearing, and then we’re supposed to watch you guys. Avaron especially told us not to get involved in the battle.” Lyke shrugged.</p>
		<p>“We will eat, then those who are willing will help Avaron. We will not let our leader fight alone. It is a promise we made the moment we were born.” Leif announced. A cheer from all the Ronens proved that the whole Clan agreed.</p>
		<p>“I am not letting my husband fight alone.” Iris’ mother.</p>
		<p>“This is not only Father’s battle, it is all of ours.” Ivy.</p>
		<p>“I am not a coward. I will lay my life for my Clan.”</p>
		<p>“Avaron may need us. We cannot desert them at a time of need.”</p>
		<p>As more voices joined, Lyke sighed and turned to Zevyn. “Looks like we can’t follow Avaron’s order after all.” Zevyn nodded glumly.</p>
		<p>“Come on. We will take you to the clearing. Have some food and arm yourselves.”</p>
		<p>“Are we ready?” Leif’s voice echoed around the clearing. A chorus of agreement satisfied him, and he turned around to face Iris and Ivy.</p>
		<p>“Let us go.”</p>
		<p>Iris, Zevyn, Lyke and Ruben led the strongest Ronens to the clearing. They heard the sounds of battle long before they reached. The screeches of the Veria made the roars of Makix and the growls of the Musker sound as insignificant as a background drone, and the shouts and screams of the Streos, Hikints and the Shadow’s army were barely heard at all.</p>
		<p>“What is the plan?”</p>
		<p>The Ronens gathered around Lyke, Zevyn, Iris and Ruben as they explained the leaders’ plan.</p>
		<p>Zevyn started sketching a diagram on the earth with her claws. “This is the main tunnel built by Chester and the Musker. It connects to these tunnels. The Musker would be hiding here, and when the Shadow comes, they collapse these two tunnels, so some of the Shadow’s army go down. They put dummies all around here, so the Shadow will think we will attack from behind when in fact, we attack from the front itself.”</p>
		<p>“Double bluff. Nice,” Leif commented.</p>
		<p>“The Streo archers are here, on the Veria. They attack from up, and at the same time, this tunnel is collapsed.”</p>
		<p>“Attacked from up and down.” Ivy couldn’t help murmuring.</p>
		<p>“Yeah. Then all around here, the Xasfi drag some soldiers into the forest and leave them there for the Tsist to take care of. The Xasfi go this bit, and with the Makix, separate a few soldiers to use for the catapult.”</p>
		<p>At this, Ivy started laughing. “Excellent idea!”</p>
		<p>Lyke nodded. “The Hikints control the catapults. The Makix tie up the soldiers and give them to the Hikints, and they are catapulted onto their own army.”</p>
		<p>“Brilliant.”</p>
		<p>“After that, all of them regroup and attack the Shadow’s army together. And right now, it sounds as though the Shadow’s army is too big to have weakened them enough.”</p>
		<p>“So what are we waiting for?”</p>
		<p>“We have to find out which stage of the plan they are in.” Iris nodded.</p>
		<p>“I can go,” a tabby cat offered, padding up to Leif.</p>
		<p>“Yes, thank you, Jaquar” Leif said. Jaquar slunk towards the battle field silently, sniffing the air every now and then. He disappeared behind a clump of ferns. After some time of impatient waiting, the cat reappeared at a run.</p>
		<p>“They are all fighting already. The Shadow’s army is too large for Avaron,” he reported.</p>
		<p>“Come on then. Let’s save Imagneus!” Lyke cried, lightning appearing in his hands. He turned and ran for the battlefield with everyone behind him.</p>
		<p>They spilled out onto the bloody field. They immediately saw that Jaquar was correct, the Shadow of Death’s army outnumbered Avaron’s three to one.</p>
		<p>Lyke and Zevyn were the first to reach the battling armies. Their arrival caused the enemy army to stop in surprise, and that one second hesitation led to some of their deaths. Avaron’s army seemed to have regained their hope that they might win, and they fought harder.</p>
		<p>Iris wielded a sword and charged at four soldiers overpowering a Xasfi. The two headed beast could do nothing against the soldiers, and just as one had raised its sword to kill the Xasfi, Iris ploughed her sword through it, and it fell to the ground with a look of utter shock on its face.</p>
		<p>While the other three were regaining their composure, the Xasfi attacked, killing all three with one blow of its long tail. Muttering a thanks to Iris, he swivelled his heads towards three more soldiers heading in their direction. He knocked out two with his tail, while Iris dealt with the third. And they fought on like that, side by side.</p>
		<p>Ruben had taken to the skies, joining the Veria. One of them was carrying two archers, as the second archer’s mount had succumbed to injuries. Ruben allowed the archer to sit on his back instead, receiving a nod of gratitude from the Veria.</p>
		<p>Ivy had changed into a tiger, and was fighting back to back with Victoria, her bond. Their claws were swift and accurate, and helped many soldiers to leave the world.</p>
		<p>Lyke and Zevyn together had taken a tour of the battleground, yet could not find the Death Lord anywhere.</p>
		<p>“The coward! He is making his soldiers fight his battles while he slinks around, out of harm’s way!” Zevyn spat.</p>
		<p>“We’d better not waste time. Come on,” Lyke said, jumping down on his thunderbolts. When he was near the ground, he started showering lightning onto the Shadow’s enemies, who screamed in terror, but did not flee. Zevyn joined her brother, swooping low to distract the soldiers while Lyke killed them.</p>
		<p>And the fight wore on, the sun set, and the moons rose to glory. Faztex shone brighter than the others, and suddenly dark clouds covered the sky. Avaron’s army fought on, undeterred, but unsettled when their enemies started grinning wickedly.</p>
		<p>“What in the world?” Lyke whispered, staring as the clouds formed a giant face.</p>
		<p>“It’s the Death Lord!” Zevyn gasped.</p>
		<p>Something in Lyke’s head seemed to click, and he immediately formed a lightning shield, attempting to protect the whole battleground, but he wasn’t powerful enough. He could shield only half the ground, not more. Zevyn rose until she was level with the clouds and tried to blow the clouds away, using her wings to create tremendous winds, but even that didn’t work. The clouds started pouring, but what came down wasn’t rainwater, it was decaying bits of flesh, which on making contact with the ground, turned into horrifying lifelike replicas of everyone still breathing in Avaron’s army.</p>
		<p>They started marching slowly, staggering like zombies. The Death Lord’s laughter wafted from the clouds.</p>
		<p>“How are we going to defeat them?” A Hikint whispered, terrified. All the creatures backed away, forming a frightened group in one side of the field. An evil Veria flapped its wings, but they were torn and it couldn’t use them.</p>
		<p>An idea flashed into Avaron’s head. “That is how! They cannot fly!” he gasped. The others seemed to have realized it too, and every creature which could fly spread their wings, but all of a sudden, the Death lord made a face in the clouds, and it flashed to everyone that if they flew up, the Shadow would destroy them for sure.</p>
		<p>Lyke helplessly struck his own evil twin with lightning, and to his surprise, it disintegrated and an even more unpleasant reek filled the air.</p>
		<p>“Their weakness is lightning? Or is it the elements?” Lyke wondered out loud. Zevyn’s eyes flashed with hope. She immediately flew towards one of the Veria and asked her to spit fire at the zombies. The Veria did as she asked and as soon as the flames touched some evil Makix, they screamed and turned to ashes.</p>
		<p>Avaron laughed. “Genius!”</p>
		<p>All the Veria assembled in front of everyone else at once and rained fire on the zombies. In no time, everything was ashes. A furious roar stopped them in their tracks and the Shadow descended onto the ground. His soldiers immediately positioned themselves behind their Lord.</p>
		<p>The Shadow of Death opened his mouth in a soundless scream and the clouds fell to the ground. Lyke immediately put up his lightning shield, and the clouds were electrified and turned to smoke as soon as they touched it. As soon as the last cloud was gone Lyke sat on the ground, his energy drained.</p>
		<p>Avaron stepped forward. “You fight me, one on one,” he challenged the Shadow, who only smiled wickedly. The Death Lord launched himself at Avaron without a warning, but the Ronen leader was ready. Just before the Shadow of Death reached him, he held out the little crystal lotus, and the Shadow crashed into the lotus instead of Avaron. The lotus went straight through the Death lord’s chest and embedded itself there. With a startled cry, he glanced down at the transparent lotus sitting in his chest, growing bigger and bigger, spreading throughout his body.</p>
		<p>“What have you done?” he whispered at Avaron, falling down, trying to pull out the lotus. The crystal flower grew and grew until it filled his whole body, and he turned into crystal too, before breaking into a million pieces. Only one small part was intact, in the shape of a little lotus.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
