<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Legacy of the Lotus</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-021">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Chapter 21</h1>
		<p>Everyone stared in shock for a few moments. Then Lyke shouted, “It’s over!” and suddenly everyone was screaming in ecstasy. </p>
		<p>“We did it!” Ruben flew to his bond. Ivy changed back to normal and hugged Victoria. Avaron was still staring at the crystal pieces in front of him, as if he still couldn’t believe it was over.</p>
		<p>The Shadow’s minions stared at what was once their leader. Realization that they were leaderless hit them like a brick. As one, they turned and fled, climbing over each other to escape. The Veria and Tsists finished them, taking no prisoners.</p>
		<p>Everybody made a huge deal out of going back to the clearing; dancing and singing the whole way. They shared the wonderful news with the joyful non-warriors of the clans and tribes, who went out of their way to create a tremendous feast for dinner for the starving battlers. </p>
		<p>After eating like never before, they were quickly treated before partying the rest of the night. A peaceful noon greeted them was they woke, and they were reminded of the task in front of them; paying tribute to the fallen.</p>
		<p>They went to the battleground and carried all the dead back to the clearing, where they were cleaned up and ready to be buried. It was a solemn procession that took the bodies to their final resting place. A teary farewell followed the digging of many graves, mostly done by the Musker again. </p>
		<p>When the sorrowful job was completed, they gathered in the clearing again, where Iris reminded her father of May, Ron, Carra and Josh. </p>
		<p>“We shall fetch the other children now itself,” he decided. Calling Minkin, the two discussed the matter with Avaron’s wife. By evening, Minkin had opened a doorway straight into the Lotus Guardian’s lair. Avaron himself went through, with Ivy and Leif. Iris, Ruben, Lyke and Zevyn decided to stay back, not willing to meet the serpent again. </p>
		<p>In no time, Avaron was back with all of them, and Jessica and Josh’s father too, whom Avaron had picked up from his home. </p>
		<p>A happy reunion took place, and introductions were made, and the Ronens finally set off, back to their camp.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
