<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000c.1">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">DVG</h1>
		<p>D.V. Gundappa, popularly known as DVG was more a phenomenon than an individual. There is a saying in English – “Some write books on history, but some others create history”. DVG belonged to the latter category. Born in a Tamil family on 17th March, 1887 in a predominantly Telugu region - Mulabagal in Kolar District of Karnataka – he was a very great scholar in Sanskrit and English. There is a saying in Kannada that there is no leaf which the goat does not touch. There is no subject on which DVG has not written. It is said about Oliver Goldsmith that there was nothing he touched which he did not adorn. DVG’s works are innumerable to be even mentioned in a short note like this. However, just a few must be mentioned to understand the stature of this intellectual giant. He has written five biographies, among them two on Vidyaranya (1983), eight Memoirs, among them one on Artists (1970), one on Literature creators (1970), one on the Dewans of Mysore (1971) and one on Vaidic traditionalists (1972), two works on Children’s literature, four works on nonfiction prose. His interest in Drama and Theatre resulted in the writing seven plays, among them the translation of Shakespeare’s Macbeth (1936, 1974). His works on religion are a special category by themselves – Purusha Sukta (1953, 1971), Isopanishat (1953, 1970) Bhagavadgita Tatparya (1966, 1971), God (1973) and Rita, Satya, Dharma (1975). He has to his credit fifteen collections of poems, among them Nivedana (1924, 1933, 1956), Vidyaranya Stuti (1924) Antahpura Gite (1950, 1953), Valmiki Vyasa Vandanam (1951), Gita Shakuntalam (1960, 1961) etc. However, two of his very special works are Manku Thimmana Kagga &amp; Marula Muniyana Kagga. Many scholars think that his Manku Thimmana Kagga which has seen many editions (1943, 1950, 1958, 1964, 1969, 1987 et al) is his magnum opus. However, it is his most popular work and there are many who can recite it from the beginning to the end as they do the Bhagavadgita. There are as many as twenty scholarly works of comment and criticism on it. The English translations of Mankuthimmana Kagga by Sri. D. Seshagiri Rao and Sri. A. Narasimha Bhat who have also translated DVG’s Marula Muniyana Kagga and the six Audio Cassettes by Swami Brahmananda must be specially mentioned. The best Kannada critics have written books and articles on DVG Among them, Professor L.S. Seshagiri Rao, C.N. Mangala, T.N. Padmanabhan, G.S. Chakravarthi, P. Balakrishna Rao and G.P. Rajarathnam. “A special mention must be made of Shatavadhani Dr. R. Ganesh who is an authority on DVG and he has made a special study of the metrical experiments in DVG’s poetry. It may not out of place to mention here that DVG was quite a “Personality”.“A very impressive figure, a wonderful and witty conversationalist, a dominating “presence” in any company, a lover of life with great zest and zeal, he gave assurance of a complete man. The tradition he belonged to – the great scholar Govinda Pai, the translation pioneer B.M. Srikantaiah, the students’ pet T.S. Venkannaiah, A.R. Krishna Sastry of Prabuddha Karnataka, the charismatic orator C.K. Venkataramaiah and my own teacher, V. Sitaramaiah.”</p>
		<p class="text-right"><strong>-S. Ramaswamy</strong><br /> Fellow, Silliman College,<br /> Yale University, USA</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
