<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-002">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Larger Goal</h1>
		<p class="myquote"><em>Young men, life is before you. Two voices are calling you – one coming out from the swamps of selfishness and force, where success means death and the other from hilltops of justice and progress, where even failure brings glory. Two lights are seen in your horizon – one, the fast fading marsh light of power, and the other slowly rising sun of human brotherhood. Two ways lie open for you – one leading to an even lower and lower plain, where are heard the cries of despair and the curses of the poor, where manhood shrivels and possession rots down the possessor; and the other leading to the highlands of the morning, where are heard the glad shouts of humanity and where honest effort is rewarded with immortality.</em></p>
		<p class="quote-author"><strong><em>-John P. Altgeld</em></strong></p>
		<p><span class="bigletter">I</span>s there a larger goal in life? – Yes says the Saint Kanakadasa. We all pray with our heart and soul to the Person residing in the higher abode (God) for salvation, with devotion for one’s satisfaction, strengthen the soul and attain eternal happiness.</p>
		<p>The above goals are much different than basic goals of getting food and shelter but need to coexist with them. Divinity, Soul, Devotion, Happiness belong to only human beings and not for other animals. Humanity arises therefore because of such a higher purpose in life.</p>
		<p>Saint Kanakadasa in that aspect was fortunate as his hunger to basic needs was very small and could be fulfilled by hunting or farming. He was a person who had learnt music &amp; literature and had realized his supreme God through this. He could attain happiness by singing prayers. Can we be in the same state or get to that? As he had complete faith in Lord Keshava (Krishna) do we have faith in any other subject? Like his goal was happiness through devotion, what is our goal? Goal is one of the forms of goodness.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
