<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-004">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">What do we mean by Good?</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">A</span>ll of us desire good things in Life. Everyone aspires for good conduct. What do we mean by good? What is good? Does whatever appears beautiful and sweet is all those good? For some, taste of liquor is sweet. Some like face which has been artificially made up with the use of cosmetics and goggles. So, can we conclude that this is goodness? What might appeal to us at one moment may look distasteful after sometime. Food that we consume out of lot of liking may actually be rendered tasteless after we are saturated with its consumption. What will decide the goodness of our likes and dislikes? What are the attributes of goodness and what is its form?</p>
		<p><strong>Origin of Good or Goodness</strong> – is having the right or desirable quality. In Sanskrit the equivalent of good is Sat ()-the ideal; pure and true essence (nature) of an entity or existence in the Vedanta or alternatively or something that is eternal.</p>
		<p>Sat in the context of Gita can be identified in Chapter 17, verses 26-27 as</p>
		<p class="verse">
			<em>sad-bhave sadhu-bhave ca</em><br />
			<em>sad ity etat prayujyaet</em><br />
			<em>prasaste karmani tatha</em><br />
			<em>sac-chabdah partha yujyate</em><br />
			<em>yajne tapasi dane ca</em><br />
			<em>sthitih sad iti cocyate</em><br />
			<em>karma caiva tad-arthiyam</em><br />
			<em>sad ity evabhidhiyate</em>
		</p>
		<p>The concept is also famously expressed in a mantra found in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad (1.3.28),</p>
		<p class="verse">
			<em>Asato mâ sad gamaya / tamaso mâ jyotir gamaya /</em><br />
			<em>mrtyor mâ amrutam gamaya</em>
		</p>
		<p>“Lead me from delusion to truth; from darkness to light; from mortality to immortality”</p>
		<p>Sat has been adapted as: <em>sattva</em> “purity” and <em>satya</em> “truth”.</p>
		<p>A quality or feature which remains unaffected by the boundary of region and remains unchanged with reference to time can be referenced as being good. In other words a universally acceptable and agreed character can be termed as good. Above all this, the main characteristic of goodness is one that is eternal and can remain unaffected in its form.</p>
		<p>Then what in our world can remain forever? All that is recognizable by our senses is changing constantly and almost in real-time. All objects living and non-living keep getting created and destroyed. In this mortal world what can be recognized and accepted as immortal?</p>
		<p>All our great saints prophase that God is the only truth and eternal. Holy men and spiritual leaders in all countries and in all religions have believed that God is the only truth and does not undergo deformity. Every second innumerable changes are taking place in the world and beyond all this is hidden some supreme energy. This energy is residing in earth, sky, inanimate and animate objects of this universe working and controlling all acts from behind as the unquestionable Emperor. This supreme energy is God, Divinity, Supreme soul and Goodness. There is nothing other than this which can be considered as good.</p>
		<p>That conduct, that realization, that practice and finally that experience which leads us to realization of this energy is Goodness. Any other thing which can obstruct this process can be termed as bad or evil. There is one God but his names and forms are innumerable. Likewise Goodness has only one definition and is one philosophy, its forms and effects are different.</p>
		<p>Based on this, our sages have determined what is good and what is bad and this goodness has been called as noble character.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
