<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-006">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Our Purpose</h1>
		<p class="myquote"><em>The game of life requires all one’s energy to play it at one’s best. The present gives us the only chance we have for doing. To use it in futile grief or regret is to leave something worthwhile undone, indulge in something that does no one any good and interferes with maintaining a cheerful spirit that brings happiness to self and to others.</em></p>
		<p class="quote-author">-<strong><em>Samuel Fessenden Clarke</em></strong></p>
		<p><span class="bigletter">F</span>or our life to be fruitful and meaningful there is greater necessity to have knowledge of right goal and means to achieve it. The purpose of this book is to help charter a map which can be supportive in this journey of life. This thought and exercise is not of the easy order. Our great ancestors have no doubt left behind valuable directions in this regard but where does it stand in the era where newer technologies and science are evolving daily, newer religions and factions are getting formed and our mind is constantly getting dragged in innumerable directions shaking the established faith of life. In this technologically advanced environment we have to reexamine our challenges in life.</p>
		<p>This book is not aimed at scholars but written with intention to reach out to large class of common people. Life as a whole is beyond the capabilities of human language and the roots of life’s experiences is much deeper than the root of knowledge.</p>
		<p>To those scholarly readers there could be many questions that arise during the course of reading, I request you to continue reading till the end and then make a review of this writing.</p>
		<p>The author’s second request is this writing is not an instant solution to your current challenges in life. Man’s life is vast and inexplicable to be captured in few words. I would rather not dare to say that through this I will be able to help you establish your purpose of life in one shot. The philosophy and premise of this book is many fold. It would be more appropriate to call it as mind’s inclination, behavior and occupation rather than philosophy.</p>
		<p>As the breadth and length of the river get larger we would require more channels and pillars to build the bridge, so is the case with our life where our intellect and mind needs to take different forms to meet its challenges. Our life is a daily fight and we need to have practiced various techniques to emerge victorious. One leg is inadequate to walk and one hand is not enough for our work. Just like that one, philosophy alone doesn't suffice to stay productive in this life. This does not anyway suggest that there is something greater that will be revealed here. The attempt that is being made here is also not something that is outstanding, not a difficult one and nor challenging. To make our life self satisfactory and meaningful one we do not require some special books, we need few simple formulae which can be comprehended by us and strongly hold on to those by practicing them. The best example to such a life is that of Mahatma Gandhi. He was not a great scholar nor did he research on great works, all that he did was to have belief in few principles and live by it with higher dedication to make it fruitful. Whatever may be our philosophy or fundamental principles the key to success lies in strong belief and following it with higher commitment? It is futile to having read great works by great scholars and unable to inculcate and emulate any of them in our daily lives.</p>
		<p>If we need to see improvement in state of our fellow beings then there needs to be a change in their thought process. For this the mind has to transform itself, as unless this transformation takes place none of the others can change for better.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
