<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-007">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Three Main Characteristics</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">F</span>irst and foremost is the devotion to life has to increase. Life is a larger object and living is an art. To lead a good life is neither a sin nor act of shame. The philosophy “To make life good and lead that in the most purposeful manner is our duty” should be deep rooted in our minds and heart. That is progress. Progress simply means upward movement in life or having a right goal and moving towards achieving it.</p>
		<p>What is right or good has been the question that is addressed to a certain extent. For now let us consider all those actions accepted and acknowledged, which lead to better state of life as right or good.</p>
		<p>Secondly, faith in human efforts has to increase tremendously among our fellow human beings. In the most challenging situations one has the ability to discover what is good and how to achieve that. To know that duty and put all the efforts with strength and wisdom is what is called for. Such courageous character needs to be firm in our people’s minds. Science is a result of this progressive evolution and in turn is responsible for further progress.</p>
		<p>Thirdly, our daily conduct needs to be filled with sweet and friendly radiance. Humility and goodness in our conduct needs to be natural rather than that is arising out of fear towards law, society or religious institution. Good conduct should have developed because of thoughtful alliance to such characters instead of blind faith.</p>
		<p>Therefore, there is need for strong inculcation of three characters : a) Enthusiasm towards Life b) Human Efforts and c) Social Network. Practical application of these are i) Progress ii) Science and iii) Humility respectively. A wholehearted belief in the above is the necessary preparation for enabling growth of civilization.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
