<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-008">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Present Living</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">A</span>ren’t people living like this today? Yes, they are but it is insipid and half hearted in approach. It is directionless and following herd instinct without a definitive purpose. It also appears to be unscientific, unenthusiastic and lacking any courageous act.</p>
		<p>Our life is being led very mechanically lacking independent review of it and giving it a lack luster appearance. A true life should resemble that of a plant not that of a machine. Plant has everyday fresh life with new sprouts, buds and flowers. Likewise our lives need to be radiating daily with new activities and accomplishments than appearing dull and boring. If we are not breathing freshness to our life through our individual efforts and thinking, it is as good as we are dead.</p>
		<p>The irony of our country today is any one we meet is constantly talking about god, holy men, holy scriptures, supreme energy, being truthful and non-violence but is completely absent in their actions and practices. This leaves us with irreconcilable situation between our speech and conduct. Why is there such a disconnect?</p>
		<p>If we look geographically India is blessed to have vast land which is fertile, abundant natural resources, long coastal lines and more importantly large population with majority of people having reasonable intelligence that can be put into use.</p>
		<p>In spite of this, we are having sizeable population still living below the poverty line, many households suffering from chronic diseases and people who are clueless about tomorrow’s living. On one hand we are talking about economic progress being made through growth of service industries but unable to bring in innovation and take advantage of it, we are marketing medical tourism but unable to provide adequate healthcare system to needy. All this leads us to when and how do we become self-reliant and strong?</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
