<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-012">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Voice of Great Saints</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">A</span>mong all the works that have been in the world, Vedas have been recognized as the most ancient work. We do not get any indication of a fragile and weak mind but on the contrary it clearly voices strength, courage and determination. The prayers rendered by the great saints during this period is as follows: “Oh God! We need to live, provide us with longevity, let our ears keep hearing the most auspicious things, let our tongue taste the most delicious food, let our minds be brimming with enthusiasm, let our speech be strong, let our intellect be vibrant, let we have the best physical ability, let our enemies loose and flee, let our wealth grow and let the productivity of food and cows increase. Oh god! Let you be served by us hundreds of years with rejoice and happiness, let us get adequate rain at right times, let the productivity of field increase, let us not get affected by diseases, give us objects of enjoyment”. Such was the Aryan race’s enthusiasm towards life, self-confidence, aspiration to be victorious; they never exhibited any signs of despair, frustration and disinterest. They always considered adventurous journey filled with energy and courage.</p>
		<p>Our ancestors such a thought process does not mean they did not have challenges in life. In midst of such prayers they always witnessed natural disasters, atrocious human behavior, fear of enemies, loss of hope, poverty, illness, separation and death. At one end there was birth of life’s aspirations in different forms and at the other end there was accumulation of difficulties and hardships. At this juncture Holy Scriptures of India (Vedas) originated. What lies at the inner crest of our life? What lies beyond that is visible to our human eyes? What is there inside each of us? Where is the food for this river called life? Who holds the strings and controls spring of energy that is seen in our life? Where does the Sun come from? How are seasons controlled? What is death and what lies beyond it? – These are the questions that might have posed for a very long time on which human minds have debated and the result of which is seen as the summary of Upanishads.</p>
		<p>Such debates continued for a fairly long time and in the process gave birth to different religions. Some people believed and declared rituals and sacrifices as supreme. Some of them considered customs and practices to be great and while some others meditation and penance. Few considered family and charity as greater and others detachment from social system. There was also those believed in each of the above philosophies and considered them to have individual significance based on place and time.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
