<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-014">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Fallacies of Vedanta</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">T</span>his world is creation of Brahma and is completely under his influence, every living being in its primary form is a reflection of Brahman, if man lives with wisdom it might be possible for him to realize this higher form, purposeful living with right thinking is good and not bad has been preached in Upanishads. But this preaching never got into hearts and minds of common people. All works of Sri Adi Shankaracharya are in Sanskrit. All works which originated later can be grouped into a) works of scholars and b) works of commoners. Works of scholars were in Sanskrit and that of the commoners were in the colloquial languages such as Hindi, Kannada, Bengali, Tamil, Telugu etc. The differences in these two groups of works are not at the level of language but in the nature of its subject. Scholarly embellished works were based on the commentaries of Shankaracharya or others; they were logically oriented, grammatically correct and meaningfully presented. There are few works which claim as the exact thoughts of Sri Adi Shankaracharya and few others which decry the same and argue against it. In response to this there are few which reclaim the first one and others which recommends denial of what Sri Adi Shankarcharya has proposed. Likewise we can find innumerable arguments in favor and against which are logically based.</p>
		<p>In the texts of commoners we find more discussion on as to which of the above thought process or philosophies is more sacred. This human body is dry log of wood, why such ornamentation to this body, attachments to wife and children is like a puppet show, why such interest and dedication to them, world is but an illusion, life is a bubble, to claim human effort is exaggeration everything is fate driven and determined by our past actions, happiness is a dream, beauty is a mirage and it is futile to put efforts in this context. One cannot escape from what fate brings and one cannot create which is not in our fate.</p>
		<p class="myquote">
			<em>Janma dukham jara dukham, jaaya dukham punah punaha !</em><br />
			<em>Samsara saagaram dukham, Sarvam dukhamayam jagath !! </em>
		</p>
		<p>This Vedanta is downtrodden and helpless. The songs sung by holy disciples of Hari and Shiva, historical stories narrated enumerating and effecting tears in eyes of listeners are all in praise of such misery laden detachment. People who have been canvassing such a philosophy have failed to remember that by making such an argument we are just accusing the creator. People who are at all times experiencing hardships develop liking towards such philosophy as they get some comfort in the words expressed there. To escape from this ocean of difficulties the only path is through fasting. One has to ill treat his body, chant hymns of god, sacrificing the world, not eat stomach full and not earn enough to completely once miseries. This is reaching to a stage where one is living life of half dead unable to leave life completely and unable to commit suicide. They constantly chant to end their life.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
