<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-020">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Natural Sciences</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">S</span>cience can be mainly classified as i) Natural Sciences ii) Social Science.</p>
		<p>In science, the term natural science refers to a naturalistic approach to the study of the universe, which is understood as obeying rules or laws of natural origin. It encompasses everything from human life to study of stars and planets. It helps us to analyze the formation, fundamental composition, principles of each object and its behavior towards other objects. To appreciate the capabilities of this we need to here recollect and name few of the accomplishments from it:</p>
		<ol class="lower-alpha">
			<li>All forms of transportation vehicles – land, air and water.</li>
			<li>Electricity and innumerable electrical appliances.</li>
			<li>Communication from Telegraph to the latest mobile gadgets.</li>
			<li>Photography and all its advancements in cinematography.</li>
			<li>Early form of printing press to the latest technologies in printing and publishing.</li>
			<li>Metallurgy, Application of fuels.</li>
			<li>Fertilizers and latest farming equipment.</li>
			<li>Traditional medicines to latest devices and drugs for Healthcare.</li>
			<li>Surgical Techniques and Equipment for curing the most complicated medical disorders.</li>
			<li>Glass and it’s varied application from ornamentation to safety.</li>
			<li>Carbon and its application.</li>
			<li>Weapons and Military Technologies.</li>
			<li>Power generation Equipment – Thermal, Nuclear, Solar Panels, Windmills.</li>
			<li>Microscope, Telescope and innumerable optical devices.</li>
			<li>Latest advancements in Information Technology Internet Revolution and its impact on communication.</li>
			<li>Biotechnology.</li>
		</ol>
		<p>The list can go on endlessly and science has impacted mankind to a large extent in every sphere of life and it is unlikely that today an individual is unaffected by at least one of them. All such advancements in Science and Technology have fostered and helped creation of God. Are we in a position to refute this statement?</p>
		<p>There could be few of them which have been put to use by certain section of people in favor of personal greed rather than helping mankind. But, where doesn’t such a personal greed exist; we have seen them in few saints, so called holy men and spiritual gurus. This does not mean all the saints; holy men and spiritual teachers can be defamed. Isn’t earning livelihood one’s duty? Is there harm in working and earning for one’s livelihood? The important thing here is about work and not about livelihood. Father of physics Newton; English naturalist and propose of theory of evolution Charles Darwin; pioneer of antiseptic surgery Joseph Lister; French Chemist and microbiologist Louis Pasteur; Scottish inventor and mechanical engineer James Watt; inventor of spinning frame Richard Arkwright; inventor of telegraph Thomas Alva Edison and many such people have used their intellect to serve human society and in process have worshipped God.</p>
		<p>Today, natural sciences are more commonly divided into life sciences, such as botany and zoology; and physical sciences, which include physics, chemistry, geology and astronomy.</p>
		<h3><em>Physics</em></h3>
		<p>Physics embodies the study of the fundamental constituents of the universe, the forces and interactions they exert on one another, and the results produced by these interactions. In general, physics is regarded as the fundamental science, because all other natural sciences use and obey the principles and laws set down by the field. Physics relies heavily on mathematics as the logical framework for formulation and quantification of principles.</p>
		<p>Key historical developments in physics include Isaac Newton’s theory of universal gravitation and classical mechanics, an understanding of electricity and its relation to magnetism, Einstein’s theories of special and general relativity, the development of thermodynamics, and the quantum mechanical model of atomic and subatomic physics The field of physics. is extremely broad, and can include such diverse studies as quantum mechanics and theoretical physics, applied physics and optics.</p>
		<h3><em>Chemistry</em></h3>
		<p>Constituting the scientific study of matter at the atomic and molecular scale, chemistry deals primarily with collections of atoms, such as gases, molecules, crystals, and metals. The composition, statistical properties, transformations and reactions of these materials are studied. Chemistry also involves understanding the properties and interactions of individual atoms for use in larger-scale applications. Some of the useful applications of this have been in manufacturing of drugs, fertilizers, dyes and paints.</p>
		<h3><em>Biology</em></h3>
		<p>This field encompasses a set of disciplines that examines phenomena related to living organisms. The scale of study can range from subcomponent biophysics up to complex ecologies.</p>
		<p>Biology is concerned with the characteristics, classification and behaviors of organisms, as well as how species were formed and their interactions with each other and environment.</p>
		<p>The biological fields of botany, zoology, and medicine date back to early periods of civilization, while microbiology was introduced in the 17th century with the invention of the microscope.</p>
		<h3><em>Earth Science</em></h3>
		<p>Earth science (also known as geosciences), is an all-embracing term for the sciences related to the planet Earth, including geology, geophysics, hydrology, meteorology, physical geography, oceanography, and soil science.</p>
		<p>Earth sciences today are closely linked to climate research and the petroleum and mineral exploration industries.</p>
		<h3><em>Engineering</em></h3>
		<p>Engineering is the discipline, art, skill and profession of acquiring and applying scientific, mathematical, economic, social, and practical knowledge to design and build structures, machines, devices, systems, materials and processes that safely realize improvements to the lives of people.</p>
		<h3><em>Medicine</em></h3>
		<p>Medicine is the science and art of healing. It encompasses a variety of health care practices evolved to maintain and restore health by the prevention and treatment of illness.</p>
		<p>Contemporary medicine applies health science, biomedical research, and medical technology to diagnose and treat injury and disease, typically through medication, surgery, or some other form of therapy.</p>
		<p>Even people who are residing in the rural areas are completely cognizant of the benefits of the mankind has derived from the above disciplines.</p>
		<h3><em>Social Science</em></h3>
		<p>Let us now look at Social Science. The Social Sciences are the fields of scholarship that study society. “Social Science” is commonly used as an umbrella term to refer to a plurality of fields outside of the natural sciences.</p>
		<p>These include: anthropology, archaeology, business administration, criminology, economics, geography, linguistics, political science, sociology, international relations, communication, and, in some contexts, history, law, and psychology.</p>
		<p><strong><em>a) Political Science</em></strong>- What do we understand by a State and what do we understand by its Government, what are the components of it; what should be the relation between government and its citizens; duties of government; reaction of public to wrong doings of the government; inter-state relationships; where is the main strength of the government; how should the system be structured if the government is to be likeable by its citizens. Political science also studies power in international relations and the theory of Great powers and Superpowers.</p>
		<p><strong><em>b) Economics</em> </strong>- Economics is a social science that seeks to analyze and describe the production, distribution, and consumption of wealth. Economics has two broad branches: microeconomics, where the unit of analysis is the individual agent, such as a household or firm, and macroeconomics, where the unit of analysis is an economy as a whole.</p>
		<p><strong><em>c) Treasury (Rajyakosha)</em></strong> – It deals with income and expenditure with respect to government. It includes various taxes, duties, levies and such other.</p>
		<p><strong><em>d) Currency (Control and Production)</em> </strong>- In economics, currency refers to a generally accepted medium of exchange. These are usually the coins and banknotes of a particular government, which comprise the physical aspects of a nation’s money supply. The other part of a nation’s money supply consists of bank deposits (sometimes called deposit money), ownership of which can be transferred by means of cheques, debit cards, or other forms of money transfer. Deposit money and currency are money in the sense that both are acceptable as a means of payment. Money in the form of currency has predominated in human civilizations from about 10,000 BCE. In most cases, each private central bank has monopoly control over the supply and production of its own currency. To facilitate trade between these currency zones, there are different exchange rates, which are the prices at which currencies (and the goods and services of individual currency zones) can be exchanged against each other. Currencies can be classified as either floating currencies or fixed currencies based on their exchange rate regime.</p>
		<p><strong><em>e) Financial Institutions</em></strong> - In financial economics, a financial institution is an institution that provides financial services for its clients or members. Probably the most important financial service provided by financial institutions is acting as financial intermediaries.</p>
		<p>Most financial institutions are highly regulated by government. Financial institutions provide service as intermediaries of financial markets. They are responsible for transferring funds from investors to companies in need of those funds. Financial institutions facilitate the flow of money through the economy. </p>
		<p><strong><em>f) Distribution of wealth</em></strong> – is a comparison of the wealth of various members or groups in a society. It differs from the distribution of income in that it looks at the distribution of ownership of the assets in a society, rather than the current income of members of that society.</p>
		<p><strong><em>g) Jurisprudence</em></strong> – Jurisprudence is the theory and philosophy of law. Scholars of jurisprudence, or legal theorists (including legal philosophers and social theorists of law), hope to obtain a deeper understanding of the nature of law, of legal reasoning, legal systems and of legal institutions. Modern jurisprudence began in the 18th Century and was focused on the first principles of the natural law, civil law, and the law of nations. General jurisprudence can be broken into categories both by the type of question scholars seek to answer and by the theories of jurisprudence, or schools of thought, regarding how those questions are best to be answered. Contemporary philosophy of law, which deals with general jurisprudence, addresses problems in two rough groups:</p>
		<ol>
			<li>Problems internal to law and legal systems as such.</li>
			<li>Problems of law as a particular social institution as it relates to the larger political and social situation in which it exists.</li>
		</ol>
		<p><strong><em>h) Sociology</em></strong> – Sociology is the study of society. It is a social science-a term with which it is sometimes synonymous-which uses various methods of empirical investigation and critical analysis to develop and refine a body of knowledge about human social activity. For many sociologists the goal is to conduct research which may be applied directly to social policy and welfare, whilst others produce purely academic theory closer to that of philosophy. Subject matter ranges from the micro level of individual agency and interaction to the macro level of systems and the social structure. Sociology is a very broad discipline. Its traditional focuses have included social stratification, social class, social mobility, religion, secularization, law, and deviance. As all spheres of human activity are sculpted by social structure and individual agency, sociology has gradually expanded its focus to further subjects, such as health, medical, military and penal institutions, the Internet, and even the role of social activity in the development of scientific knowledge.</p>
		<p><strong><em>i) Statistics</em></strong> - Statistics is the study of the collection, classification, analysis, and interpretation of data. It deals with all aspects of this, including the planning of data collection in terms of the design of surveys and experiments. It is used to understand the distribution of society in terms of physical, financial and mental health.</p>
		<p><strong><em>j) Psychology</em></strong> is the science of behavior and mental processes. Its immediate goal is to understand individuals and groups by both establishing general principles and researching specific cases. For many, the ultimate goal of psychology is to benefit society. In this field, a professional practitioner or researcher is called a psychologist, and can be classified as a social scientist, behavioral scientist, or cognitive scientist. Psychologists attempt to understand the role of mental functions in individual and social behavior, while also exploring the physiological and neuro-biological processes that underlie certain functions and behaviors. Psychology incorporates research from the social sciences, natural sciences, and humanities, such as philosophy.</p>
		<p>Like this Science has taken hundreds of forms and transforming lives of individuals in thousands of ways. Science is a result of human’s mental faculty. Application of Science is fruit of human efforts. Everyday hundreds of researchers, scientists, technologists are constantly experimenting and innovating taking forward Science as a discipline. If we look at advancements and revolution taking place in lives because of technological progress happening in countries of Europe, America, Japan and India one cannot undermine the human efforts. We can let go of such a Science but have to intelligently and cautiously make it a part of our life.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
