<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-026">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Our Devotion</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">I</span>ndians are natural devotees is a hackneyed opinion and we need to test this.</p>
		<p>In our devotion what percentage constitutes Love and what percentage Fear? Love and Fear are two distinct and dissimilar things. Majority of peoples’ devotions is only Fear. For many of them temple is a shop or a business place; is a transaction with God. “Oh! God if you beget me a child, I will give you a silver cradle”; “If you help me get a pay rise, I will perform special prayers”; “ If you help my business prosper, I will render special offerings”; or “ God ! If you keep my secret intact I will hold a car festival”; “If you make my neighbor lose his pride I will serve you” – this tit for tat, eye for an eye kind of devotion is what most people have. If one God does not yield to their terms and conditions they move on to a different God, whoever favors their transaction. The inner heart lacks pure love; it is born out of fear. It is only to appease God in fear that something evil or bad might occur disrupting our daily routines and activities.</p>
		<p>True devotion is unconditional and does not anticipate anything in return. Does mother expect anything in return from her child? Just as the Mother’s face beams with joy and contentment on seeing her child’s face, as the bird takes its flight with happiness at the dawn, as we get immersed and get lost on listening to good music, as our mind glows at the sight of a marvelous beauty; so is the devotion when mind meditates on God uninterrupted with other thoughts to experiences happiness. Such devotion is neither easy nor easily attainable. It is a result of rigorous and lengthy practice. It requires true detachment, wisdom and practice of righteousness. It constrains thoughts of personal comfort. It encourages thinking about miracles created by God in this ecosystem and how to fit and live in this ecosystem.</p>
		<p>To fit and gel in this ecosystem is itself blossoming of soul. That is the secret of custom. Home, Family, Society, State and so on are all arrangements for the practice of such a custom.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
