<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-027">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Path for Blossoming of Soul</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">W</span>e have already looked at the summary of preaching of Upanishads and Bhagvad Gita. The purpose and goal of all those are:</p>
		<p>“Any human being who considers all living things as embedded in him and acts indiscriminately and who sees the same spirit that is inside him to be in all living beings and becomes a partner in their experiences is free of sorrow and sin.”</p>
		<p>All troubles and issues arise when one has a differentiative treatment towards his fellow beings. A person who experiences oneness among all living beings will not have enemies.</p>
		<p>Such an encompassing and inclusive thought can be well appreciated but difficult to bring into practice. Such a daunting uphill task has to be scaled step by step which means it is attainable and can be fully realized only through daily observance. In that observance our mind, intellect and ears will have to synergize for blossoming of the higher and most sensitive, soul strength. That which human beings keep addressing as “I, Myself” is the soul.</p>
		<p>If we stand by side of a pond and throw a stone to the center of pond, ripples are created at center which circumferentially traverses to the pond. Our soul also has to gradually expand in a wave form and cover the entire universe. That is blossoming of soul.</p>
		<p>We can assume the waves to be prominently six in number and they are:</p>
		<ol>
			<li>Home or Family – This is the first step of expanding of our Soul. It starts with melting of “Aham” (I or me) to spread and form mine (“attachment”) to include parents, spouse, children, relatives, well wishers, and friends. It will be a great refinement of mind if we practice to shoulder equally pains and pleasures that come to our family and in other walks of life. This will be the first wave.</li>
			<li>Place of Work or Organization – Team or group that we form in our professional life. For a farmer it is his landlord and his co workers, customers for a businessman, students for a teacher, clients and judges for a lawyer so on and so forth for every individual there are several relationships that gets formed out of his profession. These relationships expand his attachment further and dilute the selfishness in him. Welfare which was earlier concerned to two or three is now shared with several people and life gets expanded. This is the Second Wave.</li>
			<li>Place – From there welfare spreads, engulfing hundreds of people and making them a part of our rightful thought process. In such a movement the narrow mindedness of caste, creed, religion, class should dissolve and disappear from our lives. This is the Third wave.</li>
			<li>State – From thereafter, attachment spreads to the State Level. We should incorporate the feeling that my fellow citizens are part of my family and fill our minds and hearts. There should not be any scope for any pride in one’s religion, caste, creed and class. Language, Literature, Knowledge, Culture and other important subjects should gain importance and should invoke a felling that all people residing in this state are one. This is the Fourth Wave.</li>
			<li>India as a Country – Our expansion of mind should not stop at the state level but has to reach the entire nation. This is our birth country, irrespective of the state, city, language, religion, caste, creed; we are first citizens of the country and then the smaller classifications such as Hindu, Kannadiga etc. In the holy river of Indian all our differences have to get washed away. This is the Fifth Wave.</li>
			<li>Human race – Our love towards our country needs to further expand and flow to cover the entire human race. Ignoring the development of others, India’s development cannot take place and without development of India there cannot be progress for any other state or region. Without development of State there cannot be welfare of city, society or family. If we segregate and observe, a human’s life which appears miniscule and the gigantic human society has an orderly relationship like a chain. Let alone the human kingdom, all living beings should enter our ecosystem. That is compassion, repentance, kindness. That is feeling of being part of universe and that is the mark of supremely intelligent.</li>
		</ol>
		<p>In view of this, our ancestors said “Udaracharithananthu Vasudaiva Kutambakam” meaning for People with larger purpose in life and higher conduct the entire world is their family which is the sixth wave.</p>
		<p>Our soul has to blossom like a flower with seven petals. That is true expansion of one’s life form or growth of soul. But the fact is in us most of the times the attachment and affection does not cross the boundary of our household. First our family and then the relatives will be the limit to which our thinking about society can extend. Our selfishness does not melt and flow beyond this. Our expansion of soul and inclusive attitude freezes at our door step. What is the use of our Vedanta being of highest order? We have confined our lives to self pity and compassion. Let alone our thinking about the entire world, we don’t even think about our city, state or country.</p>
		<p>We have explored and found various reasons and causes for India to come under foreign rule. Another important reason for this is our narrow mindedness. We lack the practice of thinking about welfare of society; it appears that we undertake any social responsibility tasks (such as building shelter for underprivileged, hospitals, planting trees) more in anticipation of obtaining safe place in heaven or obtain a clean image in society rather than born out of self drive to do something better for the ecosystem we live in. People who do not get adequate respect and status in this world do not get mind to attempt to do anything for others. Our ancestors discarded the thinking about this world as something mean. Naturally thoughts about our city or village, state, nation all vanished from our minds. “Thinking about the city, wealthy person became poor” with this opinion our people lost the national pride. This led to downfall of our society. We left the concern about the village to the village head; state to the rulers or government of state. To the extent the Village head or rulers of state were efficient citizens obtained well being. If the governors of villages and state were useless and inappropriate the citizen’s welfare worsened. Our ancestors did not define rules and principles for governors of state to appropriately deliver their responsibilities. They believed more on the ruler’s self commitment to righteousness. They did not see any reason for not keeping faith in their governors. But in our era there is higher and urgent need to have a good governing system to monitor the functioning of our Heads of State or Nation. Democracy has been a great tool and weapon which we are gifted to voice our opinion and elect an able and efficient leadership but it is our important duty to exercise this collectively with right intellect.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
