<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-028">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Harmony – Balanced Approach</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">I</span>n our time the expansion in terms of geography is very much reduced. Distance between cities and states are getting bridged in all possible ways. Travel to places which was taking several months and days has been possible today in few days and few hours respectively. Communication has revolutionized our lives where we can get in touch and be in real-time contact across time horizons and geographies with people. We are virtually getting to be one single world with entire community networked. In Sunday Market of Tippedoddi village of Mulbagal Taluk, you can find clothes from England, knives from Germany, American automobiles, Australian Cotton, crackers from Japan, toys from China. As every city and village is getting globalized is it right for us to forget the huts and houses present here? We cannot forget nor neglect any strata of society in this development process.</p>
		<p>We already have identified six strata of our society. In this context we need to always remember one principle. Smaller ones should not be obstacles for the larger ones; larger ones should not suppress the smaller ones. In our concern for our household we should not forget our city; for welfare of society we cannot split families. It would be similar to ill treating your wife in fear of your mother or expelling your mother based on complaint of your wife. For the benefit of caste and religion Nation cannot be subjected to loss and destruction. If the caste and region is getting destroyed we need not be silent on the pretext of Nation. There is no benefit in creating enemies for sake of nation and cannot allow our country to suffer in our admiration of Unified world.</p>
		<p>The challenge of righteousness or dharma that is facing us is how to stratify our Love and devotion to each of the six strata discussed above. In our pursuit to reach zenith of our life; we cannot ignore any of the six steps as irrelevant; we cannot stop and stagnate at any stage. To orderly organize all of these is rightful thinking. This is called balanced approach or harmony.</p>
		<p>Our food becomes nutritious only when various tastes and ingredients are included. Salt opposes sourness, spicy chilly is opposing to jaggery but all this put together turn out into a delicious dish. Cooking is a process of transforming all these substances to a state of co-existence and is nothing but harmony of tastes. In all our worldly transactions it is essential to have such wisely harmony.</p>
		<p>To achieve this harmony it requires principle sensitive knowledge and that is true learning. There are many things that we want in this world. In that, what is the cost of each of them? Which is more important to us? What is of top priority? - A balanced judgment has to be exercised and this knowledge is of supreme value to us. We already have seen different faculties of science and what we need to exercise on top of these is this balanced approach.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
