<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-030">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">New Pot with Old Clay</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">I</span> have mentioned before that empire of science is not without limitations. Science can capture all those which can come to experience of our senses. Metaphysical objects and their actions can be explained to an extent by Physics and Biology. The supreme energy that is behind Physics is completely unexplainable by science. For this reason we need to bear in our mind that there certain things which is beyond the boundary of science. This is because looking at the scientific inventions and discoveries, Scientists can over stretch themselves to believe that nothing is farfetched for it. Last few years the advancement of Science and Technology has been profound, the nuclear advancements, travel to moon and exploration of other planetary objects, information technology explosion and so on. This is going to continue further but one basic tenet has to be remembered that science is part of world nature and is not beyond nature, it is in fact child of it. We have been able to create all these miracles from the raw material and principles made available by nature; clay is the same the pot that is being molded is new; hands of the potter is still the same the wheel that is available to make pots is different. Science has not created any new sense or any new organ. Even if succeed to develop something new the basis of that still will be of the same clay. What comes to light from this is that Science is an effort to bring out all the hidden capabilities of ancient nature; but will not create new nature itself. Scientists unlike Supreme saint Vishwamithra have not taken a path to create a new form which did not exist earlier. Even Vishwamithra attempted to create a clone of four faced Brahma which is an act of copying but not originality. As the limitations of Science are of this nature, it is not wise to lose our intellect to newer scientific thoughts and discard the everlasting spiritual knowledge. There is no conflict between Science and Spirituality. There is no need for a Spiritual practitioner to accuse Science. Life looks complete and gets beautified when one blends Science and Spirituality; Science at level of transactions and Spirituality at level of thinking.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
