<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-031">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Beware of Westernisation</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">F</span>or many years now we have been influenced and attracted by the show off of the western society, there mannerisms, their dress sense, etiquette and food habits. That glittering make-up is giving way to fading faces. Behind the rosy lips there are unbrushed teeth; inside the perfume filled clothes are those bodies which have not seen water for a long time. Intoxicating food, deadly weapons are the wonders of science. Kill, Eat, Loot is becoming the mantra of many nations. If we scrape the civilization make-up we are seeing the behavior similar to that of wild animals. Civilized Face, Devil’s mind appears to be the progress of western world.</p>
		<p>This no way suggests that the western civilization is filled with wrong things and no reason for us to consider all of them as evil. There are many courageous and brave accomplishments in them. In current Indian Society there are hundreds of practices and acts which are demeaning and derogatory. Our job is to carefully examine the both the societies, select and adopt best of them. In the acts of humans whether they belong to eastern or western world there are many weakness and lacuna natural to their character. Therefore there is no sect or society which can be supremely idealized. Every human creation is bound to be subjected to independent examination and research. That independent wisdom is our duty.</p>
		<p>Spiritual world is not visibly present, does not give scope for anyone to argue that it is untrue. The power of our senses is limited is a fact known to everyone. Eyes cannot smell; ears cannot see forms; nose cannot hear sounds. Every sense organ has different capabilities. Those which are not accessible to eyes are accessible to nose, that which appears false to nose is confirmed as truth by ears; things which are said to be unseen by ears are seen by eyes. Something that is not identified by one sensory organ can easily identified by other. The field of influence of any sense organ is limited. Eye power of every individual is different if one has the capability to spot something that is there few inches away and some can spot few feet away. But no human eye can spot that is miles away. Same is the case with one’s ears. If one kind of music can bring out happiness and pleasure for certain group of people, the same can be boring and not so pleasant to others but no one can hear the naturally s produced sound few miles away. Therefore what can be true for sense organ can be totally false for other. All of us have different tastes and preferences, if one likes sweet; it might be completely distasteful to others. As we observe that the capabilities of every sense organ is distinct and limited; one cannot refute the claim that there could be things which are beyond the capabilities of these sense organs. For this reason, our ancestors believed that soul is something that is beyond our cognition and cannot be subjected to our examination and held Vedas as the supreme evidence. The great saints who had insights far deeper than our sense organs and Vedas formed their gospel of experience.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
