<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-034">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Debt to Nation</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">O</span>ne of the common difference between us and citizens of the western world (referred to as England in the original book) is with reference to the constant recollection of our debt to nation. A citizen in the West fully acknowledges the privileges and support rendered to him by government and is cognizant that he has to receive more and in-return he has certain duties that he needs to perform is something that always stays in his memory. In our case the fact that we need to bear in mind that we are indebted to nation is itself something that is not well received by us. Our righteousness and duty does not cross the boundary of our house. We need to earn well; need to leave property for our wife and children and need to be comfortable in our houses is our thought process. Our visit to temples and holy places is also to ensure that we bring welfare and wealth to our family. The thought of nation very rarely occurs to our mind. This is narrow minded thinking of our righteousness. Duty and responsibility towards family is big and of foremost importance. But that in itself is not the complete form of our righteousness and duty. A person who does not contribute or work for welfare of co-citizen is as good as being a defaulter of duty or righteousness.</p>
		<p>A person who is bound to duty and has devotion to upliftment of soul needs to get involved in some form of social service. Pride of our duty has to flow beyond our house. Walls of our house should not become imprison our life. Our commitment to serve for one of the selfless cause will help us achieve the right fulfillment and true meaning for our life.</p>
		<p>Like this the path to improve our souls is many fold. This is also the path to improve our nation. Our holy scriptures (Vedas) which advice us on the path of philosophy and our path to create comfortable and dignified life for the entire society are not mutually opposing. They are in fact two edges of the same road.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
