<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-036">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Blend of Old and New</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">W</span>e have discussed about the progress above. What is the path for it? What are the tools and methods for it? – is difficult to analyze and comprehend. Presently in the world obstacles which were never seen earlier have taken birth. In the human history this has been period of transition. Even in that the obstacles that are posing human minds of Indians is not being posed to any other country. The reason for this is the dilemma of our ancient customs and rituals <em>vis a vis</em> western influence on our civilization.</p>
		<p>In two centuries that preceded our independence, our lifestyle had been adulterated. In the many tools and machines that Europeans introduced to India, the magic wound by some of the materialistic luxuries had been very attractive. Their strategy and equipments of warfare helped them win over many Indian states. We lost our mind to their display of valor and strength. It cast a illusion in our minds that Western Civilization is much bigger and their lifestyle is of higher order. Their way of dressing, food and entertainment, their teaching methodologies, their mannerisms – all were falsely considered by us to be better than ours and we gave up our customs and practices. So do we have to really want to become like Westerners? Just look at them and their lifestyle – there is lot of unrest everywhere, houses have become transit lounges, marriages have become contracts, whatever we like has become dharma or righteousness, husband and wife, parents and children relationship are falling apart, enmity between nations; racial discrimination and various such differences. There is fear of war, anxiety about food for common man, jealousy and uncertainty cloud in many parts of western world. Can we call this as a good civilization? Is destruction of peace feature of civilization?</p>
		<p>By asking these questions we are not suggesting everything in Western Civilization is bad. There are many noteworthy aspects of western progress. There are many things which strengthen and nourish human life that has been earned by westerners. In spite of these accomplishments there are many things which are beyond their reach is the point to be borne in our minds.</p>
		<p>Such an open criticism is possible with respect to Indian culture as well. Whatever principles of life our ancestors have found for good life are proving to be insufficient. We can remove this insufficiency by drawing many points from western culture. Westerners need to learn from Indians and Indians need to learn from Westerners. Through this mutual learning process there could be betterment of human life.</p>
		<p>One of the primary questions that is with respect to India is how to blend our ancient culture with that of the new culture of Western countries. How do we evolve a path that is favorable to our progressive path and at the same time does not make detached from our ancient history? It is not appropriate to blindly ape the Westerners without having an independent thinking of their practices. It is not a path which is of contentment and satisfaction is quite evident from their current state. At the same time it is unjust and inappropriate to completely give up the Western Culture as we all of have become part of one single globalized world. We have shredded the image and practices of brahminical attitude of staying aloof from rest of world. Those days are now behind us and will never return. Today’s world is a globalized market with connectivity across the world. We need to live with the other nations and we have identified that Western world has abundant source of valuable aspects for us. Their Science and Technology, their political and social strategies and more importantly their nature of independent thinking are some of them that needs to be absorbed by us.</p>
		<p>But, how do we blend these new things with our old practices and customs? How do we ensure that the flow of Science and technology happens from the Western world without flow of their social practices? How do we ensure that their fascination to enjoy the materialistic things of life does not blind us from spiritual introspection? These are some of imposing questions that we face. The scope of this book is not to discuss those things and find answers for them. We are just highlighting the challenges in this process.</p>
		<p>Primarily the social system of Western world is constructed on materialistic comforts. This does not mean that there have not been Saints and Sages in these places. Saints and Devotees equally exist there. But the political and economic system is strengthened because of consumerism and materialistic benefits they derive.</p>
		<p>People like those are not rare in our society. India is a place of only saints is something that no one can claim. People here are increasingly getting attracted to such materialistic comforts but if we just study our ancient culture and practices we can clearly understand that our path is distinct than that of the westerners. In our society the foundation of the social order and practices is on the human value system. Soul is greater than physical body. Achieving solace of the soul is higher than the physical pleasures. Empathy is higher than affection. Donating is higher than Earning. Righteousness is higher than Power. Indian culture stands on such a discretionary balance.</p>
		<p>For human life both body and soul are important but which is higher than the other? “Soul First, Body is secondary” says the Aryan system. “Whether soul exists or not, body is strong enough and therefore we need to look after it well” is the Western thinking. For those who believe “Soul is supreme and body is for sake of soul” their valuation of body is limited. For them how do you accept and align to their life, the system built around comforts to satisfy the body is the question. To efficiently determine this, it is required to have a independent thinking.</p>
		<p>In the Western Culture usually every person as a independent thinking which is personal to him. For us individual’s life is specially connected to society. Western marriages are primarily concerned with two individuals who are tying the knot. Indian marriages are generally related to welfare of the two families they represent. Ours is a socialistic society where as the Westerners is a capitalist society laying emphasis more on individual comforts rather than family values. Thus, in the primary vision of architecting the social structure itself we are different and therefore it does reflect similar feelings in other societal practices. Industrial revolution was the root cause for growth of their society; agriculture formed the basis for growth of our society. As the Western countries lost their mind to accumulation of wealth through trade neglecting agriculture their situation became like hen which found gems while searching for food grains. Most of the countries have lost the capacity to grow food grains and heavily import them. We have to look at ways and means of industrializing the nation without losing our focus on agriculture. This has to be exercised with caution. So, if there are ten things that needs to be learnt and adopted from other parts of the world there are equal number of things which should not be adopted.</p>
		<p>We are currently in age where different thought process, different faiths and different opinions are driving minds of people in innumerable directions leading them to a state of confusion and illusion. During these times people need to be sharp with wisdom. If we give ears to people who shout loud, then we will continue to remain in confused state. We should not be carried away by the mesmerizing campaigns of few interest groups but have independent review and thinking to find way of righteousness.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
