<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-038">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Patience – Order</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">T</span>oday’s world is fast and on-demand mode. The moment it realizes and conceives something to be good it insists to have it on immediate basis. If they are not able to achieve that goal then their immediate reaction is: revolt; revolt is often unkindly, mob behavior and violent. To disrupt the existing order or system even before thinking of constructing new one is not the right thing to do. We start holding rich responsible for all the poverty and clean homes for all the untidy ones. These things are easier to do and make them like culprits for our situations. People who became rich were at some point poor and people fail to examine the reasons and their actions that made them wealthy. No one has the patience to perform root cause analysis of their situations and identify the underlying factors which shape up their lives. This also does not mean that everyone who is wealthy has accumulated it in the most just manner but it advocates examining the governing and political boundary of accumulating wealth. Any change in system should not be a knee jerk reaction due to frustration.</p>
		<p>Society is a outcome of a long historic review; it differs from one nation to another based on the situations they have been through; in-depth research of human behavior; evaluation of explicit and implicit values. Any change that is affected without bearing these things in mind is like medical treatment becoming more horrifying than the disease itself. Human Society is an ancient building. Any attempt to rebuild and remodel has to be done with utmost caution or else in our effort to patch up one side of the wall we will bring down the other.</p>
		<p>Any change or reform in our conduct occurs due to a new opinion. This happens only when the new opinion or feeling sinks into the mind of that individual and blends into their natural mannerisms and not otherwise. As the seed that is sown in the ground takes time to get nourished and grow into a tress so does a new opinion or thinking will take time to get deep rooted into individuals to become a part of their natural conduct. Therefore it is unjust to expect and believe than any new thought that we propose to others will be taken immediately and acted upon. When the sanctity of our thought gets proved and registered in their minds they will naturally acknowledge.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
