<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Isaac Newton</title>
	<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d">
		<h1 class="level1-title text-center" epub:type="title"><span class="colour-blue">Preface</span></h1>
		<p>We usually say that achieving something great requires meditation, concentration, unity of purpose, singleness of mind and devotion to work. Isaac Newton had each of these qualities in abundant measure. His life was a meditation upon gravity, light, mathematics, alchemy and theology. That led to major discoveries, theories and laws which are basic to modern science. When he was developing his theories he frequently forgot food and sleep. He would lose his way to the Great Hall of Trinity College in Cambridge where he used to dine. When he realised it, he did not continue to the table but returned to his room to study.</p>
		<p>Great people take their studies and endeavours to sublime heights. They are not satisfied with a superficial or profitable goal. They penetrate to the very heart of the matter. Isaac Newton was a perfect example. His life is an invitation for writers to explore. He took pains to reach the truth. His was a dedicated interest in pursuit of truth, in sharp contrast to general research today which is mostly grant driven. I have attempted to bring out the greatness of Newton in the introduction to this book and shall not say more here.</p>
		<p>This book is honoured with a foreword written by Prof. Gregory Chamitoff, one of the astronauts who spent six months in the International Space Station. He is also the Lawrence Hargrave Professor of Aerospace Engineering at the University of Sydney. Newton explored gravity, which we have all experienced. Here is a gentleman who has experienced zero gravity as well. Thank you, Greg.</p>
		<p>This book is the third of my series published by Prism Books Pvt Ltd., the others being <em>Srinivasa Ramanujan</em> and <em>Albert Einstein</em>. These two books have been very well received by readers both in India and Australia. My hope is that Isaac Newton will be accorded the same welcome.</p>
		<p>Encouragement to write this book came from Pranesh Siravara, my publisher. Once I completed the first draft, I read it to the members of the <em>Open Genre Group</em> at the New South Wales Writers Centre in Sydney - Pascal Adolphe, Zita Fogarty, Helen Lyne, Silda May, Don Morison, Alita Tanswell, and Aleit Woodward. I am indebted to them for their advice and suggestions.</p>
		<p>Brian Bell, Chakravarthy Madhusudana and M Suryanarayana Prabhu read the draft word by word and suggested many changes and improvements. A big Thank You to each of them.</p>
		<p>Shubha Srikanth has done a great job of editing this book. Subba Lakshmi from Prism coordinated the production and Compuprint Services, Chennai did the design of the book. Thanks to each of them.</p>
		<p>I thank my wife Usha for her unending patience, encouragement and of course, wonderful food.</p>
		<p class="text-right">Sydney Srinivas<br />Sydney, April 6, 2017</p>
			</section>
</body>
</html>
