<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Isaac Newton</title>
	<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000e">
		<h1 class="level1-title text-center" epub:type="title"><span class="colour-blue">About the Author</span></h1>
		<p>Born in India (1946), K. Srinivas (who writes under the penname of <em>Sydney Srinivas</em>), obtained his Ph.D from the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore in 1976. Later he worked at the University of Sydney in the School of Aerospace, Mechanical and Mechatronic Engineering for over three decades. He also worked at the Universitat Karlsruhe in Germany, and the Universities of Tokyo, Niigata and Tohoku in Japan.</p>
		<p>Srinivas has written extensively on topics related to science. He has published about science and written several fictional works in Kannada and English. His articles have been published in several newspapers and magazines. He has also produced programs for the community television and Radio 2RRR in Sydney. He is now retired and lives in Sydney.</p>
		<p>Srinivas is the author of ‘Srinivasa Ramanujan’, and ‘Albert Einstein’ published by Prism Books Private Limited in 2012 and 2015. He has also written biographies of nine scientists in Kannada.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
