<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>THE RAMAYANA</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-001">
		<h1 class="level1-title text-center" epub:type="title">The Glory of Isaac Newton</h1>
		<p>Isaac Newton is beyond doubt one of the greatest scientists that humankind has ever known; in fact, many believe he is the greatest! Today, the quality of any publication, particularly scientific, is measured by its impact on the area of knowledge, usually determined by the number of citations it has received. Applying this yardstick to Newton’s achievements, one stands amazed. If everyone who referred to and applied his laws and theories were to have cited his work, he would have amassed billions of citations! Nevertheless, history took a turn because of his findings.</p>
		<p>Newton gave us a model of the physical universe, which is valid even today. Most importantly, he gave us <em>inductivism</em>, a better method to <em>do</em> science – observe, hypothesize, experiment and then accept or reject the hypothesis. His method expelled the Aristotelian way of studying, in which contemplation and exercise of reason alone mattered; in which, every object and phenomenon could be explained through abstract reasoning; the way the universe behaved, being, of course, the will of God! With Newton’s entry, out went superstition; what the Church said about the universe and its functioning mattered little. Science came of age. It came to be based on facts, which were verifiable through experimentation. <em>This </em>was <em>Scientific Revolution</em>. Nobel laureate Steven Weinberg quotes the historian Hugh Trevor-Roper, “The success of Newton’s theories eventually led to the end of burning witches.”</p>
		<p>Newton would have been surprised and a trifle annoyed perhaps, if he were to be asked, “Are you a scientist?”. Though the word<em>, science</em>, existed during his time, it did not have the meaning that has been ascribed to it today. He would have been happier if he was thought of as a <em>Natural </em><em>Philosopher</em>.</p>
		<p>All of Newton’s thoughts, works and experiments relating to motion of bodies and light found coherent expression in <em>Principia Mathematica and </em><em>Opticks, </em>his groundbreaking works. Newton’s Three Laws of Motion, as we refer to them today, are delineated in <em>Principia Mathematica, </em>the Bible for even contemporary scientists and engineers. He devised these laws to explain and govern all motion, from vehicular to planetary. <em>Opticks </em>details his study of light, its structure and properties, his mathematical contributions and his views on the universe. Not many of us are aware that scientific concepts that we use today, such as mass and velocity were first defined by Newton. <em>Principia Mathematica and Opticks </em>continue to be the pillars upon which the discipline of physical science has evolved.</p>
		<p>His interests were multifarious. His intellect spread its tentacles from physics to explore mathematics too. He introduced calculus. He worked with infinite series, especially the general binomial expansion. He had his own say in algebra and number theory, classical and analytic geometry, finite differences, classification of curves, methods of computation and approximation, and even probability.</p>
		<p>Scientists engaged themselves intellectually and academically with Newton’s theories of motion and gravity even when he was alive. And the engagement with them hasn’t waned. Although Newton’s theories are unanimously accepted, knowledge always evolves. Other masters modified and built upon the foundations laid by Newton. Albert Einstein, two hundred years later, identified a loophole in the theory. He demonstrated that space and time are relative and not absolute entities as Newton had believed.</p>
		<p>But Einstein never dismissed Newton’s scientific corpus; he only showed that Newton’s theory was not applicable at high speeds, which, however, we may not encounter in daily life. Einstein’s tribute to Newton reveals the far-reaching impact of Newton’s findings. Einstein said, “Let no one suppose, however, that the mighty work of Newton can really be superseded by (Relativity) or any other theory. His great and lucid ideas will retain their unique significance for all time as the foundation of our whole modern conceptual structure in the sphere of natural philosophy.” Einstein revered Newton, and his portrait was the only one he retained on the wall above his desk in his office at Princeton. “Fortunate Newton,” he exclaimed, “happy childhood of science. Nature to him was an open book. He stands before us strong, certain, and alone.”</p>
		<p>To quote the celebrated Irish novelist, John Banville, from his review of the book <em>Isaac Newton</em> written by James Gleick, “It is not too much to say that our world was founded by Newton.” Well, some of the facts that Newton revealed to us were already known. Galileo Galilei had already spoken of phenomena such as inertia and gravity. He knew that any object left to itself in air would fall down. Kepler, Copernicus and others had calculated trajectories of planets. Newton’s greatness was that he synthesized all this information, often only conjectures, and gave us mathematical formulae to prove and calculate physical phenomena of interest; gravity, for example. Gravity was no longer a cloudy concept; a formula was now available to calculate its effects. Newton’s Laws of Motion help calculate precisely parameters such as force and acceleration. In the words of Gleick, “He made knowledge a thing of substance: quantitative and exact.” This exactitude is his contribution to science that changed the course of scientific study.</p>
		<p>Every so often, market research agencies such as ranking.com conduct opinion surveys to establish the ten most influential people of the world. The results are surprising; Isaac Newton has always been among the top three, at second or third place after Mohammed or Jesus in the first. It is quite understandable why religious leaders make it to the list. But Newton, a scientist, makes it! Newton’s work and its impact are universally accepted.</p>
		<p>Science was only a part of Newton’s agenda. He was interested in many other pursuits – alchemy, the occult, the Bible and God. He was not like the modern scientist who seldom needs a God. Newton believed in God. Watching Newton would barely give the impression of a scientist at work. He appeared more like a magician, or a wizard invoking demons. Oft times, he could even be mistaken for a theologian involved in scriptures and in seeking truth. Michael White has titled his book, Isaac Newton: The Last Sorcerer. Wouldn’t you have expected him to be called the first scientist?</p>
		<p>What sort of a human being was he? We usually have our own imagined profile of a scientist. We associate dignity and virtue. Newton was far from that ideal image. He was human, like the rest of us. He was an egotist who was engaged in perpetual battles with other scientists. Rob Iliffe, an authority on Newton and the Director of the Newton Papers Project at Oxford University, points out, “Newton had what even his friends believed to be an innately suspicious temper that could erupt when his status, honour or competence was threatened. He went to any length to see that his name always came up, to ensure that the voices of other scientists, however great they may be, were silenced. Respect for other’s opinion was totally absent. He suffered from bouts of insecurity, dangerous pride and even mental instability”. But the spark of ingenuity surpassed all this. It is not difficult to pardon Newton for all his sins! He was a sublime genius.</p>
		<p>Newton’s family had no academic qualifications to talk about. Newton was the first of the generation of Newtons who could sign his name! His mother would have been happier had he taken to farming rather than to books. There was even an attempt to withdraw him from school. As destiny would have it, he not only studied in schools and gained university education, but excelled in academic and professional life too. He became a professor, Master of the Mint, a Member of Parliament, a knight, the President of the Royal Society and he received a funeral, the likes of which is reserved for royalty and heads of state. The inscription on his grave reads, “Mortals rejoice that there has existed such and so great an ornament of the human race!<em>”</em></p>
		<p>When asked about which scientist he’d like to meet, Neil de Grasse Tyson, the famous astronomer and TV presenter, said, “Isaac Newton. No question about it. The smartest person ever to walk the face of this earth. The man was connected to the universe in spooky ways. He discovered the Laws of Motion, Laws of Gravity, Laws of Optics. Then he turned 26<em>.”</em></p>
		<p>Science would not have been what it is, if there had not been a Galileo or a Newton, any more than music would be what it is, if Mozart or Beethoven had never lived. The greatness of Isaac Newton has been spelled out very well by the Swiss philosopher and writer, Jean-Jacques Rousseau in his <em>Discourse on the Sciences and Arts (1st Discourse) and Polemics</em>, “Those whom nature destined to make her disciples have no need of teachers. Bacon, Descartes, Newton — these tutors of the human race had no need of tutors themselves, and what guides could have led them to those places where their vast genius carried them? It is the task of this small number of people to raise monuments to the glory of the human mind.”</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
