<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>THE RAMAYANA</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-008">
		<h1 class="level1-title text-center" epub:type="title"><span class="colour-blue">Absent Minded Professor</span></h1>
		<p>As Newton settled down in Trinity College, he was shocked that most other fellows were barely interested in any study at all. They seemed to be aiming for an employment in the king’s palace or the Church. For example, George Modd and Patrick Cook, his contemporaries, stayed in the college for forty years without teaching or researching. This was obviously in sharp contrast to Newton who wanted to explore mathematics, mechanics, optics and a host of other topics and pursue truth. Once again, he became a solitary figure. In the words of Westfall, <em>This fundamental fact coloured the scene in which virtually the whole of his creative life was set.</em></p>
		<p>One has to admire his single-minded devotion to research and study. He had the focus to keep all distractions at bay. However, it also made way for absent-mindedness. There are several stories about Newton’s life in Cambridge and his absent-mindedness. Here is an extract from an account by William Stuckeley, a student at Cambridge who befriended Newton later.</p>
		<p><em>At Cambridge I often heard stories of his absence of mind, from common things of life. As when he has been in the hall at dinner, he has quite neglected to help himself; and the cloth has been taken away before he has eaten anything. That sometime, when on surplice days; he would go toward Saint Mary’s church, instead of college chapel. Or perhaps has gone in his surplice to dinner, in the hall. That when he had friends to entertain at his chamber, if he stepped in to his study for a bottle of wine, &#38; a thought came into his head, he would sit down to paper, &#38; forget his friends. Thus the human mind wholly taken up in abstract reasoning, &#38; long concatenation of causes &#38; </em></p>
		<p>A letter written by Humphrey Newton much later is also revealing.</p>
		<p><em>He always kept Close to his Studyes, very rarely went a visiting, &#38; had as few Visitors, excepting 2 or 3 Persons, Mr. Ellis of Keys, Mr. Lougham of Trinity, &#38; Mr. Vigani, a Chymist, in whose Company he took much Delight and Pleasure at an Evening, when he came to wait upon Him. I never knew him take any Recreation or Pastime, either in Riding out to take the Air, Walking, bowling, or any other Exercise whatever, Thinking all Hours lost, that was not spent in his Studyes, to which he kept so close.</em></p>
		<p><em>fforeigners He received with a great deal of ffreedom; Candour, &#38; Respect. When invited to a Treat, which was very seldom us’d to return it very handsomely, freely, &#38; with much satisfaction to Himself. So intent, so serious upon his Studies, that he eat very sparingly, nay, oftimes he has forget to eat at all, so that going into his Chamber, I have found his Mess untouch’d, of which when I have reminded him, would reply, Have I; &#38; then making to the Table, would eat a bit or two standing, for I cannot say, I ever saw Him sit at Table by himself, At some Entertainments the Masters of Colledges were chiefly his Guests. </em></p>
		<p><em>At some seldom Times when he design’d to dine in the Hall, would turn to the left hand, &#38; go out into the street, where making a stop, when he found his Mistake, would hastily turn back, &#38; then sometimes instead of going into the Hall, would return to his Chamber again.</em></p>
		<p>Newton was never known to engage in a conversation on his own accord. However, he would answer a question with great acuity. According to Humphrey, in a span of five years, Newton laughed only once. He had only three friends in Cambridge. These included John Wickins who shared a chamber with him until 1683. In fact, Newton cut off his relations with him afterwards. The other two were Humphrey Babington and Isaac Barrow. He did not mingle with anybody, even for a sport or recreation; bowling and horse riding with friends were totally out of the question.</p>
		<p>Newton rarely left his chamber and chose to eat there by himself. Even when he went to the <em>Hall </em>to eat, he sat alone as if he knew nobody there. The Hall occupies a unique position in Trinity College and Cambridge University. It is the cafeteria where the residing scholars of the college met to have their breakfast, lunch and dinner. On certain occasions, they were expected to be dressed in their formal gowns even in the Hall. Apart from a place to dine, the Hall was where scholars engaged in lively discussion. The great Indian mathematician Srinivasa Ramanujan spent five years from 1914 to 1919 in Trinity College. During those days, Bertrand Russell, the philosopher, Prof. G H Hardy, Ramanujan’s mentor and others engaged in discussions at the Hall. Being a vegetarian Ramanujan did not eat in the Hall and so missed the conversations as well. The walls of the Hall remain decorated with the portraits of Newton, Thomas Neville, Francis Bacon, John Dryden, Lord Tennyson, and Amartya Sen among others.</p>
		<p>Newton’s response to a request from Francis Aston, a fellow at Trinity, is a curious one. The latter was to travel overseas, perhaps Holland, and sought Newton’s advice. Newton’s reply was precise.</p>
		<p>As Westfall puts it,</p>
		<p><em>Aston should adapt his behaviour to the company he is in. He should ask questions but not dispute. He should praise what he sees rather than criticise</em>.</p>
		<p>Newton requested Aston to make a few inquiries about alchemy. His request exhibits a sense of worldliness on Newton’s part, which most people thought did not exist.</p>
		<p>It is interesting that Thomas Parne who collected material for the history of Trinity College made only three references to Isaac Newton while he wrote a great deal about other fellows. In a diary kept by Samuel Newton, who was the registrar of Trinity, Isaac Newton hardly gets a mention.</p>
		<p>Newton would walk in the fellows’ garden and draw diagrams in the gravel. His colleagues realised that these were important and made sure to walk around them.</p>
		<p>Perhaps Newton’s loneliness was a blessing in disguise for science. He had ample time to study, research and meditate. He could not involve himself in quotidian realities of everyday existence. He seldom left Trinity for any personal work. Records show that he stayed in the college for fifty-two weeks in 1669, forty-nine and half weeks in 1670 and forty-eight weeks in 1671. He left the college, if at all, only to visit home.</p>
		<p>Reverend John North, the master of the college, writes,<em> if Sir Isaac Newton had not wrought his hands in making experiments, he had killed himself with study</em>.</p>
		<p>He studied until two or three in the morning. He was not in the habit of visiting the Chapel. However, he never missed the church mass on Sundays. He had full freedom to do whatever he liked. The only three sins banned by the college were <em>crime, heresy and marriage</em>.</p>
		<p><span class="colour-blue"> <strong>Mother Hanna’s Death</strong></span></p>
		<p>In 1679, Benjamin Smith (Newton’s stepbrother) had a fever. Newton’s mother Hannah nursed him and in the process caught the same fever. Newton rushed to take care of her.</p>
		<p>John Conduitt writes,</p>
		<p><em>Sir Isaac attended her with a true filial piety, sate up whole nights with her, gave her all her Physick himself, &#38; dressed all her blisters with his own hands made use of that manual dexterity for which he was so remarkable to lessen the pain which always attends the dressing the torturing remedyusually applied in that distemper with as much readiness as he ever had employed it in themost delightfull experiments.</em></p>
		<p>He must have put to good use his experience in medicine, remedy and apothecary. None the less, Hannah died on June 4, 1679. We have no indication of the impact of Hanna’s death on Newton. We only know that separation from his mother in his childhood had modified his personality in several ways. Apparently, Newton visited his family home only three times in twelve years. At 37, he was heir to a fairly large property. He stayed back for four months to set the affairs in order. There were dues to be collected from tenants, one of them being Edward Storer, the stepson of Clark with whose family Newton had lived in Grantham.</p>
		<p>In 1683, Newton’s friend and roommate, Wickins gave up his fellowship and moved from Trinity to get married and enjoy a good life. Did this hurt Newton in any way? Historians have attempted to find out. Only five letters between Newton and Wickins exist. The information or feelings exchanged in these letters throw no light on the matter. To date, the exact nature of their relationship remains a mystery.</p>
		<p>It was at this stage that Humphrey Newton came into Newton’s life and lived in his chamber, helping him in many ways. One of the great services that Humphrey undertook was to transcribe <em>Principia</em>. He also copied many of Newton’s works on mathematics, theology and alchemy. He writes that Newton loved walking in his garden. He could not tolerate weeds and so hired a gardener to deweed and maintain his garden. He is known to have been utterly careless with money. He would keep about a thousand guineas by his window. Some wonder if it was a ploy to test Humphrey for his honesty. He also loved apples. He worked endless hours, again forgetting to sleep and eat.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
