<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>Prism Books</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>The Friend’s Quest</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<h2>Harshitha Hebbar</h2>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p></p>
<h3>An Imprint of Prism Books Pvt. Ltd</h3>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>The Friend’s Quest</p>
<p>Harshitha Hebbar</p>
<p>Published by</p>
<p>- An Imprint of Prism Books Pvt. Ltd.</p>
<p># 1865, 32nd Cross, 10th Main, BSK II Stage, Bengaluru -560 070</p>
<p>Phone: 080-26714108, Telefax : 080-26713979</p>
<p>
<a>e-mail : </a>
<a>info@prismbooks.com, Website: www.prismbooks.com</a>
</p>
<p>Also at:</p>
<p>
<a>Chennai : 044-24311244 </a>
<a>prismchennai@prismbooks.com</a>
</p>
<p>
<a>Hyderabad: 040-27612928 </a>
<a>prismhyderabad@prismbooks.com Kochi : 0484-4000945 </a>
<a>prismkochi@prismbooks.com</a>
</p>
<p>
<a>Kolkata : 033-24297957 </a>
<a>prismkolkata@prismbooks.com</a>
</p>
<p>Cover design : Sripad Acharya, Bengaluru ISBN: 978-81-7286-940-3</p>
<p></p>
<p>Price:  125 Total Pages : 120</p>
<p>The views and opinions expressed in this book are the author’s own and the facts are as reported by her and publishers are not in any way</p>
<p>liable for the same.</p>
<p>No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical including photocopy,</p>
<p>recording or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>Printed at: Sarada Printers, Hyderabad</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>Foreword</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<h4>“Imagination beyond Imagination!” that is this debut - novel’s author - the little girl! Harshitha!</h4>
<p>The narration darts off with a normal vigourous note of a usual middle-school atmosphere : proceeds in a normal pace for some time; and then glides into a venturesome involvement of the friends; then they get to witness the esoteric character, their apporpriate nomenclatures (through out, with the personification by the author) and their suitable behaviourism; drifts the reader along with the characters to the imaginary planer and lands the reader into the realm of clans - to partake and experience the thrill of their exciting explorations. The little girl novelist’s inventure imaginations, and their meticulous presentation - denotes - a bright progressive literary domain of acturalization - in her future.</p>
<p>This is demarked as the 1st volume and any reader would eagerly and expectently look forward for the release of Volume 2 and 3 !! and more !</p>
<p>God’s blessings are already favoured on her through her future !</p>
<p>Vasundhara Srinivasan</p>
<p>11-4--2015</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>Preface</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>The idea for this book lies solely in my imagination. I had a way with words since a young age. Thanks to my overly imaginative mind, when I was trying to invent a new game to play by myself one day. I got an idea which I decided to develop into this story. While writing this story, my brain thought up new ideas. I couldn’t fit them all in this story, so I thought of making this book as a trilogy - a series of three books. Be sure to read my next books !</p>
<p>Firstly, I would sincerely like to thank the Prism Books Pvt Ltd., for publishing my first book and the editor Mrs. Anupama for providing me with suggestions and better ways to frame my story.</p>
<p>I would like to express my gratitude towards Mrs Vasundhara Srinivasan for encouraging me.</p>
<p>I want to thank my drawing teacher Mr Suresh from Kenfortes Art Class for supporting me.</p>
<p>The last but most important thanks goes to my family for all the support they lent to me.</p>
<p>I thank you, the readers too, for reading my book. I hope you will enjoy it!</p>
<p>Harshitha Hebbar</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<h1>Dedicated to my family and to all those who would love to become Ronens!</h1>
</body>
</html>
