<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>How to Develop Self-Confidence And Influence People by Public Speaking</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-013">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">13</span>Capturing Your Audience at Once</h1>
		<p class="myquote"><em>‘A good teacher, like a god entertainer, first must hold his audience’s </em>attention<em>, then he can teach his lesson’.</em></p>
		<p class="quote-author"><em>John Henrik Clarke</em></p>
		<p>Several years ago a fuel iron company was suffering from labour troubles. Shooting had taken place; there had been bloodshed. The air was electric with bitter hatreds. The very name of Rockefeller was anathema. Yet John D. Jr. wanted to talk to the employees of that concern. He wanted to explain, to persuade them to his way of thinking, to get them to accept his beliefs. He realized that in the very opening of his speech he must eradicate all ill-feeling, all antagonism. At the very outset, he did it beautifully and sincerely. Most public speakers can study his method with profile.</p>
		<p class="myquote">This is a red-letter day in my life. It is the first time I have ever had the good fortune to meet the representatives of the employees of this great company, its officers and superintendents, together, and I can assure you that I am proud here, and that I shall remember this gathering for as long as I live. Had this meeting been held two weeks ago, I should have stood here a stranger to most of you, recognizing only few faces.</p>
		<p class="myquote">Having had the opportunity last week of visiting all the camps in the southern coalfields and of talking individually with practically all of the representatives, except those who were away; having visited in your homes, met many of your wives and children, we meet here not as strangers but as friends, and it is in this spirit of mutual friendship that I am glad to have this opportunity to discuss with you our common interests.</p>
		<p class="myquote">Since this is a meeting of the officers of the company and the representatives of the employees, it is only by your courtesy that I am here, for I am not so fortunate as to be either one or the other; and yet I feel that I sense, I represent both the stockholders and the directors.</p>
		<p>That is tact—supreme tact. And the speech, in spite of the bitter hatred that had existed, was successful. The men who had been striking and fighting for higher wages never said anything more about if after Rockefeller had explained all the facts in the situation.</p>
		<p class="text-center"><strong>A Drop of Honey and Two-Gun Men</strong></p>
		<p>‘It is an old and true maxim ‘That a drop of honey catches more flies than a gallon of all. ‘So with me. If you would win a man to your cause, first convince him that you are his sincere friend. Therein is a drop of honey that catches his heart; which, say what he will, is the great high road to his reason, and when once gained, you will find but little trouble in convincing his judgement of the justice of your cause, if indeed that cause really be a just one’.</p>
		<p>That was Lincoln’s plan in 1858, during his campaign for the United States senate, he was announced to speak in what was, at that time, the semi-barbarous part of Southern Illinois called ‘Egypt’. They were a rough lot, the men is that section, and they carried ugly-looking knives and pistols strapped to their belts even on public occasions. Their hatred of all anti-slavery men was equalled only by their love of fighting and whiskey made from Indian corn. Southern men, some of them slave owners from Kentruky and Missouri, had crossed over the Mississippi and the Ohio to be on hand for the excitement and trouble. Plenty of it was in prospect, for the rougher elements had sworn that, if Lincoln tried to talk, they would ‘run the damned Abolitionist out of town’, and ‘shoot him to fiddle strings’.</p>
		<p>Lincoln had heard these threats, and he knew the intense feeling that existed, the positive danger. ‘But if only they will give me a fair chance to say a few opening only they will give me a fair chance to say a few opening words,’ he declared’. I’ll fix them all right’. So, before beginning to talk, he had himself introduced to the ringleaders, and shook their hands cordially. He made one of the most tactful openings I have ever read:</p>
		<p class="myquote">Fellow citizens of Southern Illinois, fellow citizens of the State of Kentucky, fellow citizens of Missouri—I am told there are some of you here present who would like to make trouble for me. I don’t understand why they should. I am a plain, common man, like the rest of you: and why should I not have as good a right to speak my sentiments as the rest of you? Why, good friends, I am one of you, I am not an interloper here. I know the people of Kentucky, and I know the people of Missourains. I am one of them, and therefore ought to know them; and they ought to know me better, they would know that I am not disposed to make them trouble. Then, why should they, or any one of them, want to make trouble for me? Don’t do any such foolish things, fellow citizens. Let us be friends, and treat each other like friends. I am one of the humblest and most peaceful men in the world- would wrong no man, would interface with no man’s right. And all I ask is that, having something to say, you give me a decent hearing. And, being Illinoisans, kentruckians, and Missourians—brave and gallant people—I feel sure that you will do that. And now let us reason together, like the honest fellows we are.</p>
		<p>As he spoke these words, his face was the very picture of good nature, and his voice vibrated with sympathetic earnestness. That tactful opening calmed the oncoming storm, silenced his enemies. In fact, it transformed many of them into friends. They cheered his speech and, later, those rough and rude ‘Egyptians’ were among his most ardent supporters for the Presidency.</p>
		<p>‘Interesting,’ you remark, ‘but what has all this got to do with me? I am no Rockfeller; I am not going to address hungry strikers longing to strangle and batter the life out of me. I am no Lincoln; I am not a going back to talk to two-gun desperadoes full of corn whiskey and hatred’. </p>
		<p>True, true but aren’t you, almost every day of your life, talking to people who differ from you on some subject under discussion? Aren’t you constantly trying to win people to your way of thinking - at home, in the office, in the market place? Is there room for improvement in your methods? How do you begin? By showing Lincoln’s tact? And Rockfeller’s? If so, you are a person of rare finesse and extraordinary discretion. Most men begin not by thinking about the other fellow’s views and desires, not by trying to find a common ground of agreement, but by unloading their own opinions.</p>
		<p>For, example. I have heard hundreds of speeches on the hotly contested subject of prohibition. In almost every instance the speaker, with all the tact of a bull in a china shop, opened with some positive perhaps belligerent statement. He showed once and for all which direction he faced and under which flag he fought. He showed that his mind was made up so firmly that there was not the slightest chance of it being changed; yet he was expecting others to abandon their cherished beliefs and to accept his. The effect? About the same that results from all arguments: no one was convinced. Instantly, he lost by his blunt, aggressive opening the sympathetic attention of all who differed with him; instantly, they discounted all he said and would say; he said and would say; instantly, they challenged his statements; instantly, they held his opinions in contempt. His talk served but to entrench them more strongly behind the bulwark of their own beliefs.</p>
		<p>You see, he made, at the very outset, the fatal mistake of prodding his listeners, of getting them blending backwards and saying through their shut teeth: ‘No! No! No!’</p>
		<p>Isn’t that a very serious situation if one wishes to win converts to his way of thinking? A most illuminating statement on this point is the following quotation from Professor Overstreet’s lectures in the School for Social Research.</p>
		<p>‘A ‘No’ response is a most difficult handicap to overcome. When a person has said ‘No’, all his pride of personality demands that he remain consistent with himself. He may later feel that the ‘No’ was ill advised; nevertheless, there is his precious pride to consider! Once having said a thing, he must stick to it. Hence it is of the very greatest importance that we start a person in the affirmative direction…’. The skilful speaker gets</p>
		<p class="myquote">at the outset a number of ‘yes-responses’. He has thereby set the psychological processes of his listeners moving in the affirmative direction. It is like the movement of a billiard ball. Propel it in the direction, and it takes some force to deflect it; far more force to send it back in the opposite direction.</p>
		<p class="myquote">The psychological patterns here are quite clear. When a person says ‘No’ and really means it, he is doing far more than saying a word of two letters. His entire organism—glandular, nervous, muscular—gathers itself together into a condition of rejection. There is usually in minute but sometimes in observable degree, a physical withdrawal, or readiness for withdrawal. The whole neuro-muscular system, in short, sets itself on guard against acceptance. Where, on the contrary, a person says ‘Yes’, none of the withdrawing activities take place. The organism is in a forward-moving, accepting, open attitude. Hence the more ‘Yeses’ we can, at the very outset, induce, the more likely we are to succeed in capturing the attention for our ultimate proposal. </p>
		<p class="myquote">It is very simple technique—this yes—response. And yet how much neglected! It often seems as if people get a sense of their own importance by antagonizing at the outset. The radical comes into a confidence with his conservative brethren; and immediately he must make them furious! What, as a matter of fact, is the good of it? If he simply does it in order to get some pleasure out of it for himself, he may be pardoned. But if he expects to achieve something, he is only psychologically stupid.</p>
		<p class="myquote">Get a student to say ‘No’ at the beginning, or a customer, child, husband, or wife, and it takes the wisdom and the patience of angels to transform that bristling negative into an affirmative.</p>
		<p>How is one going to get these desirable ‘yes-responses’ at the very outset? Fairly simple. ‘My way of opening and winning an argument,’ confided Lincoln, ‘is to first find a common ground of agreement’. Lincoln found it even when he was discussing the highly inflammable subject of slavery. ‘For the first half-hour,’ declared <em>The Mirror</em>, a neutral paper reporting one of his talks, ‘his opponents would agree with every word he uttered. From that point he began to lead them off, little by little, until it seemed as if he had got them all into his fold’.</p>
		<p class="text-center"><strong>Senator Lodge’s Way of Doing It</strong></p>
		<p>Shortly after the end of the World War I, the late Senator Lodge and President Lowell of Harvard were scheduled to debate the League of Nations question before a Boston audience. Senator Lodge felt that most of the audience were hostile to his view; yet he must win them to his way of thinking. How? By a direct, frontal aggressive attack on their convictions? Ah, no! The Senator was far too shrewd a psychologist to bundle his plea with such crude tactics. He began with the supreme tact, with admirable finesse. The opening of his speech is quoted in the following paragraph. Note that even his mist bitter opponents could not have differed with the sentiments expressed in his first dozen sentences. Note how he appeals to their emotion of patriotism in his situation: ‘My fellow Americans’. Observe ow he minimizes the differences in the views they are to defend, and how he deftly stresses the things they cherish in common.</p>
		<p>See how he praises his opponent, how he insists upon the fact that they differ only on minor details of method, and not at all upon the vital question of the welfare of America and the peace of the world. He even goes further and admits that he is in favour of a League of Nations of some kind. So, in the last analysis, he differed from his opponent only in this; he felt that we ought to have a more ideal and efficacious League.</p>
		<p class="myquote">Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen, My Fellow Americans:</p>
		<p class="myquote">I am largely indented to President Lowell for this opportunity to address this great audience. He and I are friends of many years, both Republications. He is the president of our great university, one of the most important and influential places in the United States. He is also an eminent student and historian of politics and government. He and I may differ as to methods in this great question now before the people, but I am sure that in regard to the security of the peace of the world and the welfare of the United States we do not differ in purposes.</p>
		<p class="myquote">‘I am going to say a single word, if you will permit me, as to my own position. I have tried to state it over and over again. I thought I had stated it in plain English. But there are those who find in misrepresentation a convenient weapon for controversy, and there are others, most excellent people, who perhaps have not seen what I have said and who possibly have misunderstood me. It has been said that I am against the League of Nations. I am not; far from it. I am anxious to have the nations, the free nations of the world, united in a league, as we call it, a society, as the French call it, but united, to do all that can be done to secure the future peace of the world and to bring about a general disarmament.</p>
		<p>No matter how determined you were beforehand to differ with a speaker, an opening like that would make you soften and relent a bit, wouldn’t it tend to convince you of the speaker’s fair-mindedness?</p>
		<p>What would have been the result had senator Lodge set out immediately to show those who believed in the League of Nations that they were hopelessly at fault, cherishing a delusion? The result would have been futile; the following quotation from Professor James Harvey Robbinson’s enlightening and popular book <em>The Mid in the Making shows </em>the psychological reason why such an attack would have been futile:</p>
		<p class="myquote">We sometimes find ourselves changing our minds without any resistance or heavy emotion, but if we are told we are wrong, we resent the imputation and harden our hearts. We are incredibly heedless in the formation of our beliefs, but find ourselves filled with an illicit passion for them when anyone proposes to rob us of their companionship. It is obviously not the ideas themselves that are dear to us, but our self-esteem which is threatened… The little word <em>my</em> is the most important one in human affairs, and properly to reckon with it is the beginning of wisdom. It has the same force whether it is <em>my </em>dinner, <em>my</em> dog, <em>my </em>house, or <em>my </em>faith,<em> my</em> country and <em>my</em> God. We not only resent the imputation that our watch is wrong, or our car shabby, but that our conception of the canals of Mars, of the pronunciation of ‘Epictetus’, of the medicinal value of salicine, or of the date Sargon I, are subject to revision… We like to continue to believe what we have been accused to accept as true, and the resentment aroused when doubt is cast upon any of our assumptions leads us to seek every manner of excuse for clinging to it. The result is that most of our so called reasoning consists in finding arguments for go on believing as we always do.</p>
		<p class="text-center"><strong>The Best Argument is an Explanation</strong></p>
		<p>Is it not quite evident that the speaker who argues with his audience is merely arousing their stubbornness, putting them on the defensive, making it well nigh impossible for them to change their minds? Is it wise to start by saying, ‘I am going to prove so and so?’ Aren’t your listeners liable to accept that as a challenge and remark silently, ‘Let’s see you do it’.</p>
		<p>Is it not much more advantageous to begin by stressing something that you and all of your listeners believe, and then to raise some pertinent question that everyone would like to have answered? Then take your audience with you in an earnest search for the answer. While on that search, present the facts as you see them so clearly that they will unconsciously be led to accept your conclusions as their own. They will have much more faith in some truth that they believe they have discovered for themselves. ‘The best argument is that which seems merely an explanation’.</p>
		<p>In every controversy, no matter how wide and bitter the differences, there is always some common ground of agreement on which the speaker can invite everyone to assemble for the search after facts that he is going to conduct. To illustrate: even if the head of the Communist Party were addressing a convention of the bankers’ Association, he could find some mutual beliefs, some analogous desires to share with his listeners. Couldn’t he? Let us see:</p>
		<p class="myquote">Poverty has always been one of the cruelest problems of human society. We have always felt it our duty to alleviate, whenever and wherever possible, the sufferings of the poor. We are a generous nation. No other people in all history have poured out their wealth so prodigally, so unselfishly to help the unfortunate. Now, with this same mental generosity and spiritual unselfishness that has characterized our givings in the past, let us examine together the facts of our industrial life and see if we can find some means, fair and just and acceptable to all, that will tend to prevent as well as to mitigate the evils of poverty.</p>
		<p class="myquote">Who could object to that? Could Father Coughlin, or Norman Thormas, or J. Pierpont Morgan? Hardly.</p>
		<p>Do we seem to be contradicting here the gospel of force and energy and enthusiasm? Hardly. There is a time for everything. But the time for force is seldom in the beginning of a talk. Tact is more likely to be needed then.</p>
		<p class="text-center"><strong>How Patrick Henry Launched His Stormy Address</strong></p>
		<p>Every schoolboy in the land is familiar with the fiery close of Patrick Henry’s famous speech before the Virginia Convention of 1775:’ Give me liberty or give me death’. But few of them realize the comparative calm, the tactful manner in which Henry launched that stormy and emotional and history-making address. Should the American colonies separate from and go to war with England? The question was being debated with intense passion. Feelings flamed at white heat, yet Patrick Henry began by complimenting the abilities and praising the patriotism of those who opposed him. Note, in the second paragraph, how he gets his audience thinking with him by asking questions, by letting them draw their own conclusions:</p>
		<p class="myquote">Mr. President: No man thinks more highly than I do of the patriotism, as well as abilities, of the very worthy gentlemen who have just addressed the house. But different men often see the same subject in different lights: and, therefore, I hope it will not be thought disrespectful to those gentlemen, if, entertaining as I do opinions of a character very opposite to theirs, I shall speak forth my sentiments freely, and without reserve. This is no time for ceremony. The question before the house is one of awful moment to the country. For my own part, I consider it as nothing less than a question of freedom or slavery. And in proportion to the magnitude of the subject ought to be the freedom of the debate. It is only in this way that we can hope to arrive at truth, and fulfil the great responsibility which we hold to God and our country. Should I keep back my opinions at such a time, through fear of giving offence, I should consider myself as guilty of treason towards my country, and of an act of disloyalty toward the majesty of Heaven, which I revere above all earthly things. </p>
		<p class="myquote">Mr. President, it is natural to man to indulge in the illusion of hope. We are apt to shut our eyes against a painful truth, and listen to the song of that Siren till she transforms us into beasts. Is this the part of wise men, engaged in a great and arduous struggle for liberty? Are we disposed to be of the number of those who, having eyes see not, having ears hear not, the things which so nearly concern anguish of spirit it may cost, I am willing to know the whole truth; to know the worst and to provide for it.</p>
		<p class="text-center"><strong>The Best Speech Shakespeare Wrote</strong></p>
		<p>The most famous speech that Shakespeare put into the mouth of any of his characters—Mark Antony’s funeral oration over the body of Julius Caesar—is a classic example of supreme tact.</p>
		<p>This was the situation. Caesar had become dictator. Naturally, inevitably, a score of his political enemies were envious, and were eager to tear him down, to destroy him, to make his power their own. 23 of them banded together under the leadership of Brutus and Cassius and thrust their daggers into his body…. Mark Antony had been Caesar’s Secretary of State. He was a handsome chap, this Antony, a ready writer, a powerful speaker. He could represent the government well at public affairs. Small wonder Caesar had chosen him as right hand man. Now, with Caesar out of the way, what should the conspirators do with Antony? Remove him? Kill him? There had been enough bloodshed already; there was enough to justify as it was. Why not win this Antony to their side, why not use his undeniable influence, his moving eloquence, to shield them and further their own ends? Sounded safe and reasonable, so they tried it. They saw him and went so far as to permit him to ‘say a few words’ over the corpse of the man who had all but ruled the world…..</p>
		<p>Antony mounts the rostrum in the Roman Forum. Before him lies the murdered Caesar. A mob surges noisily and threateningly about Antony, a rabble friendly to Brutus, Cassius and the other assassins. Antony’s purpose is to turn this popular enthusiasm into intense hatred, to stir the plebeians to rise in mutiny and slay those that had struck Caesar down. He raises his hands, the tumult ceases, he starts to speak. Note how ingeniously, how adroitly he begins, praising Brutus and the other conspirators:</p>
		<p class="text-center">For Brutus is an honourable man;<br />So are they all, all honourable men.</p>
		<p>Observe that he does not unobtrusively, he presents certain facts about Caesar; tells how the ransom from his captives filled the general coffers, how he wept when the poor cried, how he refused a crown, how he willed his estates to the public. He presents the facts asks the mob questions, and lets them draw their own conclusions. The evidence is presented not as something new, but as something they had for the moment forgotten:</p>
		<p>I tell you that which you yourselves do know.</p>
		<p>And with a magic tongue through it all, he whipped up their feelings, stirred their emotions, aroused their pity, heated their anger. Antony’s masterpiece of tact and eloquence is given here in its entirety. Search where you will, range through all the broad fields of literature and oratory, and I doubt if you will find half a dozen speeches to equal this. It merits the serious study of every man who aspires to excel in the fine art of influencing human nature. But there is another reason, entirely aside from the one we are considering now, why Shakespeare ought to be read and re-read by businessmen; he possessed a larger vocabulary than did any other writer who ever lived; he used words more magically, more beautifully. No one can study <em>Macbeth </em>and <em>hemlet </em>and <em>Julius Caesar </em>without unconsciously brightening and widening and refining his own diction.</p>
		<p><em>Ant. </em>Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears:</p>
		<p>I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.</p>
		<p>The evil that men do lives after them;</p>
		<p>The good is oft interred with their bones:</p>
		<p>So let it be with Caesar. The noble Brutus Hath told you Caesar was ambitious:</p>
		<p>If it were so, it was a grievously hath Caesar answer’d it.</p>
		<p>Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest-</p>
		<p>For Brutus is an honourable man;</p>
		<p>So are they all, all honourable men-</p>
		<p>Come I to speak in Caesar’s funeral.</p>
		<p>He was my friend, faithful and just to me:</p>
		<p>But Brutus says he was ambitious;</p>
		<p>And Brutus is an honourable man.</p>
		<p>He hath brought many captives home to Rome,</p>
		<p>Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill:</p>
		<p>Did this in Caesar seem ambitious?</p>
		<p>When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept:</p>
		<p>Ambition should be made of sterner stuff:</p>
		<p>Yet Brutus says he was ambitious;</p>
		<p>And Brutus is an honourable man.</p>
		<p>You all did see that on the Lupercal I thrice presented him a kingly crown,</p>
		<p>Which he did thrice refuse. Was this ambition?</p>
		<p>Yet Brutus says he was ambitious;</p>
		<p>And, sure, he is an honourable man.</p>
		<p>Speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke.</p>
		<p>You all did love him once—not without cause;</p>
		<p>What cause withholds you, then, to mourn for him?</p>
		<p>O judgement, thou art fled to brutish beasts,</p>
		<p>And men have lost their reason! Bear with me;</p>
		<p>My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar,</p>
		<p>And I must pause till it come back to me.</p>
		<p>Cit. Methinks there is much reason in his sayings.</p>
		<p>Cit. If thou consider rightly of the matter,</p>
		<p>Caesar has had great wrong.</p>
		<p>Cit. Has he not, masters?</p>
		<p>I fear there will a worse come in his place.</p>
		<p>Cit. Mark’d ye his words? He would not take the crown </p>
		<p>Therefore ‘tis certain he was not ambitious.</p>
		<p>Cit. If it be found so, some will dear abide it.</p>
		<p>Cit. Poor soul! His eyes are red as fire with weeping.</p>
		<p>Cit. There’s not a nobler man in Rome than Antony.</p>
		<p>Cit. Now mark him; he begins again to speak.</p>
		<p>Ant. But yesterday the word of Caesar might</p>
		<p>Have stood against the world: now lies he there, </p>
		<p>And none so poor to do him reverence.</p>
		<p>O masters, if I were dispos’d to stir</p>
		<p>Your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage,</p>
		<p>I should do Brutus wrong, and Cassius wrong,</p>
		<p>Who, you all know, are honourable men.</p>
		<p>I will not do them wrong: I rather choose </p>
		<p>To wrong the</p>
		<p>Dead, to wrong myself, and you,</p>
		<p>Than I will wrong such honourable men,</p>
		<p>But here’s a parchment with the seal of Caesar,-</p>
		<p>I found it in his closet,-‘tis his will:</p>
		<p>Let but the commons hear this testament (Which, pardon me, </p>
		<p>I do not mean to read),</p>
		<p>And they would go and kiss dead Caesar’s wounds, </p>
		<p>And dip their napkins in his sacred blood;</p>
		<p>Yea, beg a hair of him for memory,</p>
		<p>And, dying, mention it within their wills,</p>
		<p>Bequeathing it as a rich legacy Unto their issue.</p>
		<p>4 <em>Cit.</em> We’ll hear the will; read it, Mark Antony.</p>
		<p><em>Citizens.</em> The will, the will! We will hear Caesar’s will.</p>
		<p><em>Ant. </em>Have patience, gentle friends; I must not read it;</p>
		<p>It is not meet you know how Caesar lov’d you.</p>
		<p>You are not wood, you are not stones, but men;</p>
		<p>And, being men, hearing the will of Caesar,</p>
		<p>It will inflame you, it will make you mad.</p>
		<p>‘Tis good you know not that you are his heirs;</p>
		<p>For, if you should, O what would come of it!</p>
		<p>4 <em>Cit.</em> Read the will! We’ll hear it, Antony;</p>
		<p><em>Ant.</em> Will you be patient? Will you stay awhile?</p>
		<p>I have o’ershot myself, to tell you of it.</p>
		<p>I fear I wrong the honourable men</p>
		<p>Whose daggers have stabb’d Caesar; I do fear it.</p>
		<p>4 <em>Cit.</em> they were traitors: honourable men!</p>
		<p><em>Citizens.</em> The will! The testament!</p>
		<p>4 <em>Cit. </em>They were villains, murderers. The will!</p>
		<p>Read the will!</p>
		<p><em>Ant.</em> You will compel me, then, to read the will?</p>
		<p>Then make a ring about the corpse of Caesar,</p>
		<p>And let me show you him that made the will.</p>
		<p>Shall I descend? and will you give me leave?</p>
		<p><em>Citizens.</em> Come down.</p>
		<p>2. <em>Cit.</em> Descend, (He <em>comes down)</em></p>
		<p>3. <em>Cit.</em> you shall have leave.</p>
		<p>4.<em> Cit. </em>A ring! Stand round.</p>
		<p>1. <em>Cit. </em>stand from the hearse; stand from the body.</p>
		<p>2. <em>Cit.</em> Room for Antony!-most noble Antony!-most noble Antony!</p>
		<p><em>Ant.</em> Nay, press not so upon me; stand far off.</p>
		<p><em>Citizens.</em> Stand back; room! bear back.</p>
		<p><em>Ant.</em> If you have tears, prepare to shed them now.</p>
		<p>You all do know this mantle: I remember </p>
		<p>The first time ever Caesar put it on;</p>
		<p>‘Twas on a summer’s evening, in his tent,</p>
		<p>That day he overcame the nervii.</p>
		<p>Look, in this place ran Cassius’ dagger through:</p>
		<p>See what a rent the envious Casca made;</p>
		<p>Through this the well-beloved Brutus stabb’d;</p>
		<p>And, as he pluck’d his cursed steel away,</p>
		<p>Mark how the blood of Caesar follow’d it,-</p>
		<p>As rushing out of doors, to be resolv’d if Brutus so unkindly knock’d, or no;</p>
		<p>For Brutus, as you know, was Caesar’s angel:</p>
		<p>Judge, O you gods, how dearly Caesar lov’d him!</p>
		<p>This was the most unkindest cut of all;</p>
		<p>For, when the noble Caesar saw him stab,</p>
		<p>Ingratitude, more strong than traitors’ arms, </p>
		<p>Quite vanquish’d him: then burst his mighty heart; </p>
		<p>And, in his mantle muffling up his face, </p>
		<p>Even at the base of Pompey’s statue, </p>
		<p>Which all the while ran blood, great Caesar fell. </p>
		<p>O, what a fall was there, my countrymen!</p>
		<p>Then I, and you, and all of us fell down, </p>
		<p>Whilst bloody treason, flourish’d over us.</p>
		<p>O, now you weep; and, I perceive, you feel </p>
		<p>The dint of pity: these are gracious drops. </p>
		<p>Kind souls, what, weep you, when you but behold</p>
		<p>Our Caesar’s vesture wounded? Look you here, </p>
		<p>Here is himself, marr’d, as you see, with traitors.</p>
		<p><em>1. Cit.</em> O piteous spectacle! </p>
		<p><em>2. Cit.</em> O noble Caesar! </p>
		<p><em>3. Cit.</em> O woeful day!</p>
		<p><em>4. Cit.</em> O traitors, villains!</p>
		<p><em>1. Cit.</em> O most bloody sight!</p>
		<p><em>2. Cit.</em> We will be reveng’d. </p>
		<p><em>Citizens.</em> Revenge-about-seek-burn-fire-kill-slay-let not a traitor live!</p>
		<p><em>Ant.</em> Stay, countrymen.</p>
		<p><em>1. Cit.</em> Peace there! Hear the noble Antony. </p>
		<p><em>2. Cit.</em> We’ll hear him, we’ll follow him, we’ll die with him.</p>
		<p><em>Ant.</em> Good friends, sweet friends, let me not stir you up </p>
		<p>To such a sudden flood of mutiny.</p>
		<p>They that have done this deed are honourable:</p>
		<p>What private griefs they have, alas, I know not, </p>
		<p>That made them don’t; they’re wise and honourable, </p>
		<p>And will, no doubt, with reasons answer you. </p>
		<p>I come not, friends, to steal sway your hearts: </p>
		<p>I am no orator, as Brutus is; </p>
		<p>But, as you know me all, a plain blunt man, </p>
		<p>That love my friend; and that they know full well</p>
		<p>That gave me public leave to speak of him.</p>
		<p>For I have neither wit, nor words, nor worth,</p>
		<p>Action, nor utterance, nor the power of speech,</p>
		<p>To stir men’s blood: I only speak right on;</p>
		<p>I tell you that which you yourselves do know;</p>
		<p>Show you sweet Caesar’s wounds, poor, poor dumb mouths,</p>
		<p>And bid them speak for me: but were I Brutus,</p>
		<p>And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony </p>
		<p>Would ruffle up your spirit, and put a tongue</p>
		<p>In every wound of Caesar, that should move</p>
		<p>The stones of Rome to rise and mutiny.</p>
		<p><em>Citizens.</em> We’ll mutiny.</p>
		<p><em>1. Cit.</em> We’ll burn the house of Brutus. </p>
		<p><em>2. Cit.</em> Away, then! Come, seek the conspirators. </p>
		<p><em>Ant.</em> Yet hear me, countrymen; yet heat me speak.</p>
		<p><em>Citizens.</em> Peace, ho! Hear Antony; most noble Antony.</p>
		<p><em>Ant,</em> Why, friends, you go to do you know not what.</p>
		<p>Wherein hath Caesar thus deserv’d your loves?</p>
		<p>Alas, you know not; I must tell you, then:</p>
		<p>You have forgot the will I told you of.</p>
		<p><em>Citizens.</em> Most true; the will! –let’s stay, and hear the will.</p>
		<p><em>Ant.</em> Here is the will, and under Caesar’s seal.</p>
		<p>To every Roman citizen he gives.</p>
		<p>To every several man, seventy-five drachmas.</p>
		<p><em>1. Cit.</em> Most noble Caesar!—we’ll revenge his death.</p>
		<p><em>2. Cit.</em> O, royal Caesar! </p>
		<p><em>Ant.</em> Hear me with patience.</p>
		<p><em>Citizens.</em> Peace, ho!</p>
		<p><em>Ant.</em> Moreover, he hath left you all his walks, </p>
		<p>His private arbours, and new-planted orchards, </p>
		<p>On this side Tiber; he hath left them to you, </p>
		<p>And to your heirs for ever; common pleasures, </p>
		<p>To walk abroad, and recreate yourselves.</p>
		<p>Here was a Caesar! When comes such another?</p>
		<p><em>1. Cit.</em> Never, never—Come, away, away!</p>
		<p>We’ll burn his body in the holy place,</p>
		<p>And with the brands fire the traitors’ houses. </p>
		<p>Take up the body. </p>
		<p><em>2. Cit.</em> Go, fetch fire. </p>
		<p><em>3. Cit.</em> Pluck down benches. </p>
		<p><em>4. Cit.</em> Pluck down forms, windows, anything. </p>
		<p>[<em>Exeunt Citizens with the body. Ant.</em> Now let it work:-</p>
		<p>Mischief, thou art afoot,</p>
		<p>Take thou what course thou wilt!]</p>
		<p class="text-center"><em>‘You have to respect your audience. Without them, you’re essentially standing alone, singing to yourself’.</em></p>
		<p class="quote-author"><em> K.D. Lang</em></p>
		<p class="text-center"><em>‘If the audience knew what they wanted then they wouldn’t be the audience, they would be the artists’.</em></p>
		<p class="quote-author"><em> Alan Moore</em></p><br />
		<p class="text-center"><strong>‘Once we believe in ourselves, we can risk curiosity, wonder, spontaneous delight, or any experience that reveals the human spirit’.</strong></p>
		<p class="quote-author"><em>E.E. Cummings</em></p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
