<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>VAINU BAPPU - The man who knew the stars</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d.1">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Foreword</h1>
		<p>This biography of Prof. M.K.Vainu Bappu has been written by Dr. M.S.S.Murthy. It is entitled: “Vainu Bappu- the Man Who Knew the Stars”. The title is entirely appropriate, for Vainu’s whole life was involved in looking at the stellar firmaments.</p>
		<p>Dr. M.S.S.Murthy has a Ph.D degree in Radiation Biophysics from the University of Kansas, USA. He worked as a senior scientist at the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai, retiring from there in 1997. Since his retirement, his main interest has been in writing popular science articles in English and Kannada. More than 300 of these have been published. He has also authored six books, two of them being biographies: one of Prof. Shambhunath De, who discovered the cholera toxin in the 1950s, and the other on Louise Braille, who invented the Braille Script.</p>
		<p>For writing this book, Dr. Murthy has accessed a range of sources, particularly in the Indian Institute of Astrophysics (IIA), including the original articles by Prof. Vainu Bappu and others; particularly a very good biographical memoir by Prof. J.C. Bhattacharya, who succeeded Vainu as the Director, IIA. For all this he had the support of the present Director of IIA, Prof. Siraj Hasan and Dr. D.C.V. Mallik, a senior astronomer at the IIA. He has met a large number of those associated with Prof. Vainu Bappu and involved with the formation of the Indian Institute of Astrophysics. These include Shri A.P. Jayarajan and Dr. Ch. V. Sastry. He has had very useful correspondence with Prof. K.R. Sivaraman, Dr. L.K. Doraiswamy, Dr. William Livingston and many others. Vainu Bappu’s wife, Yemuna, has been most kind and helpful in providing him with many details of Vainu’s life, including rare photographs of his childhood, of his parents, and some of the early photographs from Harvard, Nainital etc.</p>
		<p>Indian astronomy had significant achievements to its credit from the days of Ar yabhata (476 AD), through a range of commentators of the Siddhanta period, of which the last great individual was from Orissa (Samanta Chandrasekhar), two centuries ago. The experimental equipment they used were the water clock, the sun dial, the armillary sphere, the astrolabe renamed ‘Yantraraj’, and their computations were unequalled between the 3<sup>rd</sup> and 8<sup>th</sup> centuries. The last of the great experimentalist astronomers was Sawai Jai Singh of Jaipur, who built the huge masonry observatories in Delhi, Jaipur, Ujjain, Banaras, and Mathura. These were on the pattern of those of Ulugh Beg of Samarkhand, and he updated the star catalogues. Maharaja Jai Singh was aware of the work done in Europe by scientists like Tycho Brahe, Kepler, Galileo, Copernicus, Newton; but he did not follow the route of the telescope, and rather went along the older fashion. It was, thus, that India had to await a man, like Vainu Bappu, to embark on the era of the telescope, and astronomy based on this. Vainu Bappu can, therefore, be regarded as the greatest astronomer India had produced since Maharaja Jai Singh. He was truly the father of modern Indian astronomy.</p>
		<p>Vainu, like C.V. Raman and Homi Bhabha had a great sense of aesthetics and the love of Nature. He admired both Raman and Bhabha. They all shared common interests: of the beauty in the colours of nature and created by humans - the colours of the sky and the deep oceans, of gemstones, of flowers and gardens, of works of art; of the sense of music and its harmony and rhythm; of form in crystals and architecture and much more.</p>
		<p>He often quoted the famous poem of Longfellow:</p>
		<p class="myquote">
			“Lives of great men all remind us,<br />
			We can make our lives sublime.<br />
			And, departing, leave behind us,<br />
			Footprints on the sands of time”.
		</p>
		<p>At a press conference in Europe, after he became the President of the International Astronomical Union, Bappu confided that all through his life he had found directions from the lives of great men.</p>
		<p>When asked what his advice to young astronomers would be, he said: “I would give some unusual advice: to read the biographies of eminent people. I myself have read the biographies of great scientists ever since my boyhood: Kelvin, Rayleigh, Thomson, Maxwell, and Raman. I was curious to know what their own scientific work was. There is no doubt that these outstanding personalities created contemporary science. And what was their source of inspiration? It was, primarily, beyond doubt, the examples set by and the work of their own predecessors; that is why they set for themselves new goals and finally reached them. I believe that such reading is very stimulating, particularly for young people”. Since I have had very similar interests, there were many occasions to discuss the lives of such persons with Vainu, on the long car journeys from Bangalore to Kavalur and back.</p>
		<p>I am a great believer of the concept that an interest in science has to be kindled at a very young age. For this, one requires simple accounts of lives of great men and women in science. It is, thus, that one can draw inspiration from the life of a man like Homi Bhabha, and his visions in the field of nuclear energy; of Vikram Sarabhai, who envisioned the space program; and of Vainu Bappu, who dreamt of India as amongst the leading nations of the world in observational astronomy. Each one of them was a colossus and pioneer in his field. These are all persons who decided that the life for them was not to have the comforts of living abroad and the facilities available there. They decided that their future would lie in India’s future to which they would contribute. These accounts have to be written in simple language; and in a way in which it can capture the interest of the very young and of the general public. The biographies that are usually well- researched, and massive tomes, are usually only for scholars and library users.</p>
		<p>This biography is of an exemplary person, Vainu Bappu. It is somewhat in anecdotal form, in telling the story of his life and work. If it serves to excite young minds to take to the field of astronomy and that is the spirit in which it has been written, the effort would be well worthwhile.</p>
		<p class="text-right"><strong>Prof. M.G.K. Menon FRS</strong>,<br /><em> New Delhi.<br /> June 22. 2011.</em></p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
