<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>VAINU BAPPU - The man who knew the stars</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000e.1">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Introduction</h1>
		<p class="verse"><em>
			Twinkle, twinkle little star,<br />
			How I wonder what you are.<br />
			Up above the world so high,<br />
			Like a diamond in the sky.</em>
		</p>
		<p>This is not just a nursery rhyme, but a song of human curiosity about the sights and events in the night sky. In the early days, when man knew very little about the cosmos, the mysterious events there like a falling star or a burning comet spitting fire across the sky were indicative of catastrophes on earth. Even amidst this fear, some brave souls dared to study such phenomenon more objectively. Thus was born the subject of astronomy, a scientific study of matter in the outer space, especially the celestial bodies –– their evolution, structure, composition, positions, dimensions, distribution, distances from earth, motion, energy sources, their influences on earth, and so on.</p>
		<p>During clear nights, even to the naked eye, the sky presents a grand spectacle with stars, planets, different phases of the moon, and so on. They are not static like a painting on a canvas, but dynamic beyond imagination. While some stars appear dim, others are bright: some shine blue, some red, some yellow. On closer observation. Some are seen to change brightness, some are seen to change position in the sky.</p>
		<p>As knowledge about the cosmos grew – the real sizes of the objects up there, the distances between them and from earth, the violent events relating to their birth and death – fear gradually made way to awe and a thirst for more knowledge. Man sharpened his means of observation – from unaided eye to a small optical telescope of just three-inch aperture used by the 17<sup>th</sup> century Italian astronomer Galileo Galilee to discover the moons of Jupiter and the rings of Saturn, to giant ones with apertures larger than 10 meters, dotting the vantage points on earth like hilltops. With the advent of space technology, it has been possible even to launch huge telescopes like the Hubble Space Telescope and Chandra X-ray Observatory into space to peer far deeper and as far back in time as the beginning of time itself!</p>
		<p>Today, astronomers can observe these objects not only through the visible light they emit but also through a range of invisible rays from weak radio waves to powerful gamma radiation. Sitting on earth, they can estimate the distances of these objects from earth, their age, mass, chemical composition, watch their birth and death, and even speculate if life could exist elsewhere in the universe. All these have inevitably raised new questions about the matter that everything in the universe, including ourselves, is made of and ultimately our own origin and destiny.</p>
		<p>In this quest for discovering extraterrestrial intelligence, NASA the American space agency launched a satellite based observatory named “Kepler” on March 6, 2009. It has already identified more than 1200 exoplanets – that is planetary formations around stars in our Milky Way galaxy. Astronomers estimate that, of these, at least 50 may have conditions suitable for supporting some form of life. In its four years life Kepler is expected to locate many more such systems. If life exists in any of them it will be a major discovery. Will man be able to meet face to face with them? What will they be like?</p>
		<p>We know that physical (and chemical) laws like those of gravitation, electricity and magnetism, etc discovered on earth apply everywhere in the universe. Are there universal laws in biology also? Will those extraterrestrial lives be carbon–based as the ones on Earth? Are the laws of inheritance and the genetic code similar to what we know here today? These are some of the fascinating questions that the 21<sup>st</sup> century ‘astrobiologists’ would like to answer.</p>
		<p>India had a glorious past in astronomy. Ar yabhata, Varahamihira, Brahmagupta, Bhaskaracharya – these are some of the outstanding names that lit the flames of astronomical thoughts in India from as early as the 5<sup>th</sup> century BC. Aryabhata had conceived the heliocentric theory of our solar system, stating that the earth goes around the Sun and not the other way. This concept, even a thousand years later was still a blasphemy in the western world. Galileo Galilei, the famous Italian astronomer of the 17<sup>th</sup> century was imprisoned for promoting such a concept.</p>
		<p>However, in due course Indian astronomy slipped into oblivion while on the other hand western world marched ahead. It took almost 200 years for India to rise again and hold a respectable position in the world of astronomy. Today, a large number of obser vatories dot the countr y and the Indian space. Indian astronomers span their gaze from the solar system to the far away nebulae and black holes through various types of telescopes, and have made important contributions to man’s understanding of the universe. One man who made it all possible was Professor M.K.Vainu Bappu, regarded as the father of modern astronomy in India. He was fascinated by astronomy from his childhood. He regarded it as “one of the most aesthetic subjects one can encounter. There is a grandeur and homogeneity of different patterns ..... in terms of large integrals of time, distance, mass, etc. Those who are impressed by astronomy are impressed by the fact that they have this large, marvelous, staggering variety to think of. It is a reality.”</p>
		<p>In his fifty-five years of inspired existence, Vainu Bappu “achieved what will spell out his name in golden letters in the history of astronomy. He discovered new objects in the sky, found new relationships among stellar objects, built new observatories, planned and fostered new centers of research, new laboratories, and new schools of active scientists.”</p>
		<p>In his fifty-five years of inspired existence, Vainu Bappu “achieved what will spell out his name in golden letters in the history of astronomy. He discovered new objects in the sky, found new relationships among stellar objects, built new observatories, planned and fostered new centers of research, new laboratories, and new schools of active scientists.”</p>
		<p>This is his story.</p>
		<p>Though much is written about the resurgence of Indian astronomy in the later part of the 20th century and Vainu Bappu’s stellar role in shaping its course, no formal biography of his exists. I have tried to fill that gap.</p>
		<p>In my attempt to put this biography together, I have used the many essays and articles written by his colleagues, particularly Prof. J.C. Bhattacharyya who succeeded Bappu as the Director of the Indian Institute of Astrophysics (IIA) and the archives in the Institute’s library. In addition, I have interviewed some of his colleagues, serving as well as retired, who knew him from close quarters and his wife Yemuna Bappu who gracefully agreed to dwell on the memories of her late husband. I have also consulted many technical reports written by Bappu himself and others.</p>
		<p>Prof. D.C.V.Mallik a senior astronomer at the IIA reviewed the preliminary draft as well as the final proof of the book. I am indebted to his support and guidance, but for which this work would not have been possible. However, I am personally responsible for any errors and misrepresentations if they have occurred in spite of close scrutiny.</p>
		<p>Biographies have an important role to play in shaping a society. They not only preserve a sense of history for posterity, but also serve as a source of inspiration to youngsters. Life is not a bed of roses, particularly for those who strive to look for a new meaning to human existence. Their trials and tribulations, their success and failures all hold enlightening lessons to the generations that follow.</p>
		<p>I hope this biography also serves the same purpose.</p>
		<p>UNESCO declared 2009 as the “International Year of Astronomy” (IYA). It marks the 400<sup>th</sup> anniversary of the year when Galileo used his telescope for the first time to discover the moons of the Jupiter, opening a glorious new chapter in astronomy. The vision of the IYA is to help citizens of the world to rediscover their place in the universe and experience a personal sense of wonder. I hope this biography of an astronomer will serve its bit in realizing that lofty goal.</p>
		<p>A number of persons have helped me in this project: to name a few are Prof. D.C.V.Mallik, Shri A.P. Jayarajan, Prof. K.R. Sivaraman, Prof. Ch.V. Sastry, Dr. L.K. Doraiswamy and the staff of the IIA library and Dr. B.S. Shylaja, Director, Nehru Planetarium, Bangalore. I have used some photographs from Dr. A.K. Saxena (IIA) and Shri T.K. Murali Das. My special thanks to Mrs. Yemuna Bappu. I am also indebted to Prof. Siraj Hasan, the present Director of IIA who permitted access to the Institute, its staff and the library. Prof. M.G.K.Menon, former Director, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mubai, who knew Vainu Bappu personally and was closely associated with the Indian Institute of Astrophysics from its inception has graced this book with a Foreword. I am grateful to all of them.</p>
		<p>Finally, I am thankful to PRISM BOOKS PVT. LTD. for accepting to print this book and making it available to readers.</p>
		<p class="text-right"><strong>Dr. M.S.S. Murthy,</strong>,<br /> B-104, Terrace Garden Apartments,<br /> 2<sup>nd</sup> Main Road, BSK IIIrd stage,<br /> Bangalore-560085.<br /> PH: (080) 2672 4488<br /> &#60;imurthy@hotmail.com&#62;</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
