<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>VAINU BAPPU - The man who knew the stars</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-019">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span class="num">Appendix 4</span>Down the memory line of a life-long friend</h1>
		<p><strong>VAINU AND I</strong></p>
		<p class="verse">
			Your father’s vocation you made your own,<br />
			And gave it an Indian touch long unknown.<br />
			As a boy at stars you peeped,<br />
			Till as a man at fame you leaped.<br />
			You had miles and miles to go it’s true,<br />
			So why the hurry, my dear friend Vainu?<br />
			Was it that with stars you needed to be,<br />
			To everyone’s sorrow but your own glee?<br />
			Soon after that terrible day Yamuna did say:<br />
			“Gone is the center of my universe,”<br />
			But she well knew it was for you the other way:<br />
			The universe was your center to immerse.
		</p>
		<p>This is the story of an unlikely bond between two boys during the tumultuous years immediately preceding India’s independence in 1947. They were the years of the Nizam’s rule in the state of Hyderabad (which is now part of the larger state of post-independence Andhra Pradesh). The results of the Higher Secondary School Examination (HSLC) had just been announced. A student by the name of Rafat Mirza was declared the Hudson Scholar (for standing second out of over 100,000 students). He came from a prestigious school called “Madarsai Aalia,” which literally meant a school for the higher class, as indeed it was. One could spot in the guarded compound of the school sons and protégés of nawabs and other higher-ups in the government and social strata. How did the other two, Vainu and I, team up with Rafat, an aristocrat who was also an intellectual to boot, had the Hudson Scholarship to prove it, and for some odd reason did not curb his tendency to be impatient with the less gifted, thus almost “innocently exhibiting” his intellectual star power! This companionship, not in open evidence when it was in full bloom, flowered into something special during our final years in college, particularly the bilateral relationships between Rafat and myself and Vainu and myself. This story is about Vainu and myself.</p>
		<p>It all began with our attempts to gain admission into the most prestigious college of the time in Hyderabad, Nizam College, the only college from that state affiliated to the University of Madras (which, along with the Bombay and Calcutta Universities, formed the famous trio of pre-independence universities in India), and not to the state university known as the Osmania University (named after Nawab Mir Osman Ali Khan, the seventh Nizam of Hderabad). When I say “our attempts,” I mean Vainu’s and mine. As far as Rafat was concerned, considering his father’s social and government status and his own brilliance, it was a done deed. For Vainu and me it was a hard climb, one that brought us to a common path in seeking entry and, to quote from the movie Casablanca, was “the beginning of a beautiful friendship.”</p>
		<p>My father was very good at doing his homework before embarking on any activity. His immediate concern now was to get me admitted to the Nizam College. He himself held a fairly senior rank in the Nizam’s government, and coupled with my fine performance at the High School Leaving Certificate Examination (HSCE), we thought it would be easy sailing, but that was not to be. My father’s research brought out the fact that a Mr. Kurlawala was a close friend of the Principal of the Nizam College, Mohammad Quadir Hussain. He was an aristocrat in every department of human behavior: speech, demeanor, conduct and attire (a suit complete with a vest, matching tie and shoes, an artistically folded handkerchief with the appropriate exposure out of his top pocket). He had a booming voice and a compelling presence. He was also easily accessible – on the face of it, that is! At the entrance to his door stood a mountain of a man, his fierce face made the fiercer by a well-groomed moustache with the upward tilt of the fighting class, an off-white turban with a flowing tail, and a huge badge stuck to a long strip of thick cloth going across his body from shoulder to hip. He was a truly intimidating figure standing between an intending entrant and a principal with cultivated aloofness. He did not have to turn back students. They turned back on their own! Mahboob Ali was his name, and he knew how to play his game. This being the situation, rejected students and their parents seldom made any attempt to seek an interview with the principal without proper introduction from people with the right credentials. My father had the right credentials, but he was nothing if not thorough. He did not believe in taking chances.</p>
		<p>Enter Mr. Kurlawala! He and Quadir Hussein played cards on weekends, (reportedly) drank together, and in general were very close friends. Grapevine had it that Quadir Hussein would not turn down any recommendation from Kurlawala. My father had met Kurlawala at a few parties and decided to talk to him about my admission to the Nizam College. Kurlawala immediately agreed to help but wanted to “interview” me first. This took my father and me hastening to his palatial bungalow the next morning. The first sight to greet us there was a kindly looking semi-bald man with a youngster of my age standing next to him. Soon my father and I were called in and the interview went off very well. We came out happy that all would end well. As we crossed the verandah, we saw the same father and son again, but they soon passed out of my mind.</p>
		<p>A few days later I was asked to meet the principal for an official interview. I put on my newly bought suit and a new pair of pointed shoes, and even had a kerchief peepng out of my breast pocket. Mehboob Ali did not intimidate me anymore, for I was fairly sure of the outcome and could afford to be belligerent. But it was a subdued Mehboob Ali I saw that day. He was a pathan, and my thoughts went back to a similar pathan (Sardar Khan) standing in front of my father’s office who was reputed to have made enough money to build a house and amass some gold through his secondary occupation of money lending at exorbitant interest rates! Somehow, in spite of heavy payments made to repay the debt, the principal seemed forever to remain unreduced! I suspect that Mehboob Ali had a down day in a similar transaction. But what surprised me more was that I saw the same youngster I had espied at Kurlawala’s place hovering in front of the principal’s office, with a distracted Mehboob Ali not caring to stop either of us. This youngster, usually shy and reticent (as I found out later), outperformed the best of pushers and rushed past me into the principal’s office, and was out within five minutes, jaunty in step and wide in smile. It was my turn to go in now, and I too came out equally jaunty and smiling. He was waiting for me and said “I am Vainu, you must be Dorai.” The ice had been broken, similarities had been identified, and the door for a lasting friendship had been opened. There were many other similarities awaiting us, did we but know.</p>
		<p>Rafat and I opted for chemistry as major and Vainu for physics. Spectroscopy was his strong suit, and thanks to C.V. Raman’s seminal contributions in that area (including the discovery of Raman Effect, for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize), it was a flourishing area of research in India and Vainu joined the crowd. Chemistry was less glamorous, and statements such as the following (which is not a verbatim quote, but close) by Sir J. C. Ghosh, one of the leading chemists of the India of the mid-twentieth century and a former director of the Indian Institute of Science, did not help.</p>
		<p><strong><em>Chemistry is all empirical, trial and error, that anyone can do – the ass not excepted.</em></strong></p>
		<p>Even as a freshman in college, Vainu started his own research in spectroscopy. His father was employed as an observer in the Nizamiah Observatory in Hyderabad. Vainu used to go with his father and gaze at the stars, take closer views through telescopes, and learned a great deal about the use, construction and repair of telescopes and spectrometers. He was an exceptionally gifted experimentalist. He also knew the nebulae, the galaxies, the stars, their locations, and much more. During his years at Nizam College, he assiduously built on this boyhood exposure to astronomy, and cultivated an incredible fondness for research — not any research but the kind where you literally probed the unknown. His interest was deep, not just peripheral, professional. He had made up his mind – he wanted to reach for the stars.</p>
		<p>Stricken by a driving ambition to discover something new, to write something new and lasting, Vainu worked his heart out. Shy by nature, and talking when only talked to, he was one of a kind. In the days following our return to Hyderabad after receiving our Ph.Ds from USA, we were reluctant to accept any job and decided to wait for the right one. But that was not easy. The state government that had financed our education in USA demanded that we accept any job offered to us. This drove us to unimaginable depths of frustration. But they were memorable days too. Vainu’s father had built a small cottage inside a huge compound in one of the best neighborhoods of Hyderabad — Begumpet. We met often either in that house or in mine (3, Jeera, Secunderabad). He lived close to a hill of rocks of different sizes and shapes, some very weird and almost frightening in the gathering dark of early evening. We would climb to he top of the hill and pour out our frustrations to each other.</p>
		<p>Finally Vainu got his release and took a job in an observatory at Somnath in Uttar Pradesh. From that time forward, he was no longer just a friend of a few. The nation and science claimed him. He was highly regarded – without many of the external trimmings of greatness. But he couldn’t care less. Soon honors pours poured in, one upon another. But he was the same Vainu. Some of his shyness and nervousness to give speeches had gone. He spoke with utter clarity, making complex things look simple – the hallmark of a great scientist and speaker– but a far cry from the Vainu of the Nizam College days. An incident that has remained unfaded in my memory was the occasion when C.V. Raman gave a talk at the college. By unanimous consent, Vainu was chosen to introduce him. We discussed his introduction in great depth for days before the event. Phrases like “There is no need to introduce the sun to the tropics” and many similar ones were considered and rejected, till the final few lines were carefully crafted. The moment arrived. Vainu stood up and walked to the podium, with a sheet of paper in his hands. He stood, and stood – petrified! No words came. Finally he blurted out: “I present to you Sir C. V. Raman” (or something close – I do not fully recall), and made a hasty retreat to his seat.</p>
		<p>We met once while we were in USA. I was working in New York and he was paying a visit to Princeton. We had a truly fantastic time: had lunch in a nice little restaurant on Wall Street and took a train to Princeton early in the evening. Went straight to his friend’s house, where we had a delicious meal, and spent over two hours discussing astronomy (I had by hen developed an amateur’s interest in his subject), Einstein, who was still there, and Godel (about whom I knew nothing then, but who has since become one of my heroes). Vainu’s friend (whose name I forget) regaled us with jokes about the great Master and his little known walking companion (Godel), What a wonderful time it was to be in Princeton those days – Princeton where the universe was being discovered, and discussed in weekly meetings attended by some of the most dazzling minds of the world – including Einstein, Freeman Dyson and many other luminaries. The day ended with a brief visit to a restaurant in the Village in South Manhattan, where we drank some exquisite wine and ate a couple of sandwiches each — Vainu finishing off two meat ball sandwiches on rye with great gusto and relish. That was a day to remember.</p>
		<p>As I conclude this trip down memory lane, I see him walking across the cricket field in Nizam College, one side of his face covered with books, me on the other side – with Vainu whispering: “Is anybody watching us?” We were both incredibly self-conscious, had many similar traits, and enjoyed the unique happenstance of many similar uncannily identical stages in our lives. I was the “best man” at his wedding. He was nervous beyond words and would whisper to me: “ Dorai, stick close to me - and tell me later how everyone was reacting.” Due to unavoidable reasons, I did not have the privilege of his presence at my wedding - none to watch and tell me how the guests were reacting!</p>
		<p>Sleep well, my friend - in the recollection of a life gloriously lived - and do try to tell Yamuna - and me - why you had to hurry back to the comet that bears your name. In the land of your birth, a special gateway to the skies and stars you loved forever announces your name in a lasting tribute to your boyhood dreams enshrined in the rotating mirrors and gyrating beams of Kavalur’s Vainu Bappu Observatory.</p>
		<p class="text-right"><strong><em>L.K. Doraiswamy</em></strong><br /><em> Director, National Physical Laboratory (Retd), Pune.</em></p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
	</section>
</body>
</html>
