<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>VAINU BAPPU - The man who knew the stars</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-020">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Vainu Bappu in a nutshell</h1>
		<table>
			<tr>
				<td>1927</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>Born on August 10, 1927.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1943</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>Graduated from Nizamia College, Hyderabad.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1946</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>First scientific paper appeared in Current Science.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1949</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>Joins Harvard University on a Govt. of Hyderabad scholarship. W hile at Harvard discovered Bappu-BokNewkirk Comet and was awarded the Donohoe Medal by the ASP.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1952</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>Awarded Carnegie Fellowship for 1951-52. Spent one year at Mt. W ilson and Palomar Observatories. Bappu was awarded Ph.D. Returns to India after visiting many observatories in USA and Europe.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1954</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>Appointed as Chief Astronomer at the UPSO, Varanasi.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1955</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>UPSO observatory shifted from Varanasi to Manora Peak.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1956</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>Weds Yemuna.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1957</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>Published his seminal paper on W ilson-Bappu Effect in Astrophysical Journal in 1957.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1960</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>Appointed as Director, KodaikanalObservatory. Modernizes observational facilities at Kodaikanal.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1962</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>Starts site survey for a stellar Observatory at Kavalur.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1967</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>Commissioned 38 cm telescope at Kavalur.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1970</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>Leads a team to observe total solar eclipse at Mexico.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1971</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>Birth of the Indian Institute of Astrophysics.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1972</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>One-meter Zeiss telescope commissioned at Kavalur. Founded the Astronomical Society of India and was elected the President.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1973</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>Puts up a proposal for an for Kavalur.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1975</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>IIA headquarters shifted from Kodaikanal to Bangalore.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1977</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>Co-authored a paper on the Uranus rings using the 1-meter telescope at Kavalur, which was published in Nature. Was presented the Sri Hari Om Ashram Award in Physics.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1979</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>Elected President of the International Astronomical Union.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1980</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>Leads an expedition to observe the solar eclipse at Jwalagere.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1981</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>Was honored with the National Award of “Padma Bhushan”.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1982</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>Passed away on August 19, 1982.</td>
			</tr>
			<tr>
				<td>1983</td>
				<td>-</td>
				<td>Was posthumously awarded the S.N. Bose Medal of the INSA for 1980.</td>
			</tr>
		</table>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
	</section>
</body>
</html>
