<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>VAINU BAPPU - The man who knew the stars</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-021">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Bibliography</h1>
		<ol>
			<li><strong><em>The nature of comets</em></strong> – M.K. Vainu Bappu. Astronomical Society of the Pacific Leaflets, Vol. 6, pp 229-235, 1952.</li>
			<li><strong><em>H and K emission in late-type stars: Dependence of line width on luminosity and related topics</em></strong> – O.C. Wilson and M.K.V. Bappu . Astrophysical Journal, Vol. 125, pp 661, 1957.</li>
			<li><strong><em>K-emission line widths and the solar chromosphere</em></strong> – M.K.V. Bappu and K.R.Sivaraman. Solar Physics, Vol.17, No.2, pp 316330, 1971.</li>
			<li><strong><em>The Indian Institute of Astrophysics</em></strong> - M.K.V. Bappu. Kodaikanal Observatory History, 28<sup>th</sup> September, 1975.</li>
			<li><strong><em>Stellar chromospheres</em></strong> – M.K.V. Bappu. Proceedings of the 64<sup>th</sup> Indian Science Congress, Part II, pp 41-60, 1977.</li>
			<li><strong><em>Extended ring system of Uranus</em></strong> – J.C. Bhattacharya et al. The Moon and the Planets, Vol.21, pp 393-404, December 1979.</li>
			<li><strong><em>Astronomy in India during the period 1787-1947</em></strong> – Collection of reports, Kodaikanal Observatory History, September 28, 1975.</li>
			<li><strong><em>Kavalur</em></strong> – M.K.V.Bappu, Indian Institute of Astrophysics Historical Papers, 1981.</li>
			<li><strong><em>Obituary: Prof. M.K.V. Bappu (1927-1982)</em></strong> – S. Ramaseshan, Current Science Vol. 51, No. 17, pp 857-858, September 1, 1982.</li>
			<li><strong><em>Chromospheric emission intensities and stellar evolution</em></strong> – M.K.V. Bappu, Current Science, January 5, Vol. 51, No1, 1982.</li>
			<li><strong><em>M.K. Vainu Bappu (1927-1982)</em></strong> V. Radhakrishnan, Journal of Astrophysics and Astronomy, Vol. 3, pp 217-218, 1983.</li>
			<li><strong><em>Obituary: M.K.V. Bappu</em></strong> – J.C. Bhattacharya, Quarterly Journal of Royal Astronomical Society, Vol. 24, pp 360-367, 1983.</li>
			<li><strong><em>Manali Kallat Vainu Bappu</em></strong> (1927-1982) Elected Fellow – J.C.Bhattacharya, Biographical Memoirs of the Fellows of the Indian National Science Academy, Vol. 10, pp 16-33. 1985.</li>
			<li><strong><em>King Comet</em></strong> – Bhaskar Datta and J.C. Bhattacharya, Science Age, September 1985.</li>
			<li><strong><em>Road to Kavalur</em></strong> – J.C. Bhattacharya, Science Age, 1985.</li>
			<li><strong><em>Project Kalki: A sky survey with 45 cm Schmidt Telescope</em></strong> – R. Rajamohan et al. Indian Journal of Astrophysics, 15, pp 174178, 1987.</li>
			<li><strong><em>Vainu Bappu Telescope</em></strong> – J.C. Bhattacharya and K.T. Rajan, Bulletin of the Astronomical Society of India, 20, pp 319-343, 1992.</li>
			<li><strong><em>A decade with VBT 1986-1996</em></strong> – Indian Institute of Astrophysics.</li>
			<li><strong><em>Twenty years of observational astronomy at the Indian Institute of Astrophysics</em></strong> – D.C.V. Mallik, Current Science, Vol. 74, No. 9, May 10, 1998.</li>
			<li><strong><em>On the Wilson-Bappu relationship in the Mg II k line</em></strong> – Angelo Cassatella et al. Astronomy &amp; Astrophysics, Vol. 15, June 2001.</li>
			<li><strong><em>When the Sun goes out</em></strong> – M.K.V. Bappu. Reprinted in Resonance, Vol. 7, No. 8, August 2002.</li>
			<li><strong><em>Reaching for the stars</em></strong> – R.C. Kapoor, Indian Institute of Astrophysics Brochure, October 2006.</li>
			<li><strong><em>The bureaucrat and the stargazer</em></strong> – Indira Chodhury, Mid Day, January 20, 2009.</li>
			<li><strong><em>Remembering Bappu</em></strong> - Indian Institute of Astrophysics Brochure, august 10, 2010.</li>
			<li><strong><em>Astronomy &amp; Astrophysics</em></strong> – A decadal vision document 2004, Indian Academy of Sciences.</li>
			<li>Profile of Vainu Bappu written by a number of his colleagues can be accessed at the Repository of the Indian Institute of Astrophysics. Web site <a href ="https://www.iiap.res.in//">www.iiap.res.in</a>.</li>
		</ol>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
	</section>
</body>
</html>
