<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Success, Wealth and Fame All Free of Cost !!!</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000c.1">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Publisher’s Note</h1>
		<p>It is our privilege that during the 150th year of Swami Vivekananda’s birth, we are publishing this wonderful title “Pay for Excellence and get Success, Wealth and Fame all free of cost” by Shri A. R. K. Sarma.</p>
		<p>Shri Sarma, an ardent devotee of the Ramakrishna Mutt, has been doing a yeoman service to the society in general and the youth in particular by meticulously bringing to the front, the message of Swami Vivekananda, in a very simple and lucid style. He very carefully relates the Swamiji’s thoughts to most modern, contemporary views on Management and Self-development.</p>
		<p><em>“Don’t look back - forward, infinite energy, infinite enthusiasm, infinite daring, and infinite patience -then alone can great deeds be accomplished”,</em> so says Swami Vivekananda. Shri Sarma takes us through a repertoire of such thoughts and deeds in his writings.</p>
		<p>PRISM is pleased to be publishing this work and hope to do more in the series with the support of Shri Sarma. It is a matter of pride for PRISM, that during the 150th year of the Swamiji, we are embarking on a project to translate Swamiji’s works from Bengali into Kannada. We hope that the readers will enjoy and benefit from these works.</p>
		<p>Pranesh Siravara</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
