<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d.1">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Foreword</h1>
		<p>Devanahalli Venkataramanaiyya Gundappa, popularly known as DVG is often compared to an ashwattha tree (Ficus Religiosa) in the forest of Kannada renaissance which is both literary and cultural. In him we find many wonderful personalities that include a great scholar, ace journalist, profound socio-political thinker, cultural Messiah, literary master and a great humanist. He is simultaneously good and wise, self-less and humble, friendly and disciplined, traditional and modern, hearty and brainy and many more. He is one among those rare great sons of India too who played a remarkable role in its struggle for political and cultural freedom in an inimitably self-less manner. To sum up in one word, DVG is a modern Rsi of India in general and of Karnataka in particular.</p>
		<p>Apart from his manifold social, political, cultural and the like service-activities, DVG wrote extensively in Kannada and English.</p>
		<p>Especially his writings in Kannada that include a large variety prose and verse, rich in both quality and quantity, comprising of poems, plays, songs, translation, children literature, biographies, pen-portraits, memoirs; technical writings in the field of political science and journalism, philosophy and religion, poetics and criticism are a class by themselves and have stood the test of time. Thus he has naturally become one of the pioneers of Kannada literature in shaping and empowering it as a complete language.</p>
		<p>Even today some of his prose and verse writings are best sellers and torch bearers in the area of beautifying the lives of one and all. They are equally appealing to both head and heart and endear the learned and the lay alike.</p>
		<p>Baaligondu Nambike (Faith for Life) is DVG’s one of the most popular and profound works. In this, basing on his own contemplation of life, he has made a wonderful and equally successful attempt towards synthesizing as practical philosophy of life which is lucidly understandable and adoptable to one and all. In fact the author himself has stated in his foreword that this work is an honest attempt towards the realization of his own life’s purpose and process, faith and function.</p>
		<p>The complete writing is very simple to understand lively to read and lovely to contemplate upon. Though the wisdom contained in it is sublime and eternal, no where the author has made it pedantic and preaching. In this short booklet, DVG has practically given the distilled philosophy of the East and the West that has paramount use in the way of leading a simple and sublime life. Nothing in this sweet work is impractical and nonspiritual. Every word is loaded and every leaf is a journey of joy. What the author has attempted in his other three great and well known works namely the <em>Mankutimmana Kagga</em> a poem, <em>Jnaapakacitrashaale</em> a memoir and <em>Jeevanadharmayoga</em> a scholarly study on the <em>Bhagavad Gita</em>, is succinctly summed up here.</p>
		<p>Such a masterly writing is rendered in to English by my good friend Sri S M Haricharan. Hence he definitely deserves the wholehearted compliments of all those who are interested in enriching their lives. It is a long felt need of many and that has been aptly fulfilled by him. The sad part of the modern Indian youth is the absolutely zero knowledge of the masterly writings of the savants in the regional languages. Due to this ignorance, they are often going to the cheap and corrupt western versions of our classical wisdom. Least to say that it is highly deplorable and when such is the situation, it is very heartening that qualified and sensible youngsters like Mr. Haricharan are coming forward to take this task of mirroring the masters of Indian languages in to readable English and help the less-privileged. Sri Haricharan, apart from being a technocrat, a serious student of Indian culture and literature. His interests in music and philosophy too are commendable. His present task of taking DVG through his little classic Baaligondu Nambike to the larger world of English-readers is rewarding in many ways and I take this opportunity to congratulate him for this labor of love. May such efforts of him and the like increase and perpetuate not only the memory of DVG, but also of many masters like him.</p>
		<p class="text-right"><strong>Shataavadhani Dr. R. Ganesh</strong></p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
