<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000e.1">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Preface</h1>
		<p>This book is a translation of one of the most prolific thinker, literary wizard of Karnataka Dr. D.V. Gundappa (fondly remembered as DVG). The original book written in is collection of essays and articles written by Dr. D.V.G and published in the then leading dailies in the near post independence period of 1950. The questions that are raised are highly thought provoking and just provide a glimpse of what a great visionary and social thinker he was. It is hard to believe that some of them even now are relevant and haunt us as responsible citizens of this country. It tries to shake us from our comfort zone that we all have established as self-centered individuals and take the ownership of contributing to larger part of society and thereby putting the entire nation on a progressive path.</p>
		<p>Each time I have read the original work it has startled me as to how execution of some of the recommendations could have helped our nation in shunning the developing nation tag and put itself to strongly compete with the economic powers. The articulations used by the author to identify the differences existing between the western civilization and us and thereby suggest a path that is conducive yet result yielding is simply superb.</p>
		<p>My humble attempt at translation of this great work is more of self gratifying experience to share with larger audience which has English as second language invariably. The spark to take up this project came when Dr. R. Ganesh mentioned as to what a huge benefit it could be if the original work were to be available in English. By stating this, I have no right to take the credit of bringing this for benefit to the society and nor is there a need to demonstrate the intellectual strength and the social contribution Dr. DVG rendered during his lifetime. It is quite magnanimous and he will be recollected for centuries to come through innumerable works, the gem of which being Mankuthimmana Kagga.</p>
		<p>This journey of translation that I undertook has transformed me for better and helped me to set in right objectives for myself. It is this benefit that I would like to pass on to you when you read this work. I am joyous and thankful that you already have taken first step in this direction by picking up this book for reading. The book is not intended to any selective audience but to each one of us who have the innate desire to achieve and build something that is impactful for larger part of society and which is beyond our selfish desires and passions. You, as a reader may be of any sex, be in any profession or of any socio-economic background and any age, this reading will compel you to rethink and reorient for better personal and professional life. This is definitely not a self-help book or is aimed to drive home any philosophy. It will serve you to wake up to some hard facts that can be an eye opener for taking positive action.</p>
		<p>First, I need to thank Gokhale Institute of Public Affairs and Shri S R Ramaswamy, Honorable Secretary of GIPA for benevolently allowing me to go ahead with the publication and printing of this translation work.</p>
		<p>I am deeply indebted and thankful to Dr. R. Ganesh who has been my inspiring Guru and has taken pain to review and obliged with a Foreword for this book. It was his remark during one of our study circle discussions that kindled my thought to take up this task.</p>
		<p>My friends in personal and professional life who have impacted my thought process directly or indirectly during this period of translation.</p>
		<p>My special thanks to Mr. Pranesh Siravara, MD of Prism Books and his entire team for accepting to publish work of a novice like me. Their encouragement and support has helped me to humbly offer this book to all you readers.</p>
		<p>Of course, it would definitely not have been possible without the encouragement and support of my immediate family – Anna, Amma, Chethan, Shilpa and Sarvajeeth.</p>
		<p class="text-right"><strong>– S.M. Haricharan</strong></p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
