<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-001">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Life</h1>
		<p class="myquote"><em>How mean am I when Life gives me gold and I<br /> give you silver, and yet I deem myself generous.</em></p>
		<p class="quote-author">-<strong><em>Kahlil Gibran</em></strong></p>
		<p><span class="bigletter">W</span>hat is Life? Why Life? What do we live for? Do we live to die or is there any higher meaning to our Life? The great Saint Kanakadasa has said the following:</p>
		<p>“Every work done by every individual in this world is to satisfy the three basic needs food, shelter and clothing. We often speak kind words to impress others and lie to each other to curry out materialistic gains. People assume various roles and behave pretentiously it is only for sake of above benefits.”</p>
		<p>So should we conclude and sum it up that this is the mystery of life.</p>
		<p>In our houses the livestock, pets, roaches and rodents all live for this purpose. All animals dwelling in the forest, birds in the sky and all other living beings live to satiate their stomach, strengthen their shelter and seek sweetness of love. No living being can escape the thoughts of food, sleep, companionship and overcoming fear of death which are common to all. What one needs to examine and introspect is whether the fate of human- being is being confined to such thoughts like other animals or is he higher to them in any aspect? Is there an objective or goal to humanbeing higher than striving for food, shelter and clothes?</p>
		<p>If we look at people around us it doesn’t seem or appear that any such questions cross minds of at least fifty per cent of them. Most of them live like any other animal striving hard day in day out without a higher purpose in life. They finally rest in peace without having made any impact or impression to the external world of their existence. It is very apt to recollect what Isaac Asimov mentioned in Encyclopedia of Science &amp; Technology which is that one in 6 million who have walked on this earth have managed to leave footprints behind them and rest of have just passed like insects.</p>
		<p>Is this the right thing to do? Is there any other noble thought or purpose of life that can be identified by us?</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
