<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-003">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Individual Goals</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">I</span>n this world there are innumerable people and all of them are different. Difference is not only in the physical form or appearance but also in their mannerisms and behavior. As we observe that the distribution of the various organs in the human body is in the same proportions with respect to different individuals there are subtle differences which makes us to distinctly identify. Even when the individual is not directly in front of us we are able to recognize by his voice or may also be from few mannerisms which every individual would have built. The differences are not essentially on the physical aspects but also on the other features or attributes the individual possesses such as responses of the sensual organs coupled with characteristic differences such as one being more arrogant, friendly, and compassionate or likes and dislike. At the macro level there are differences in the individual on the socio-economic aspect varying from someone being poor to extremely rich.</p>
		<p>Like this, individuals across the world have some common attributes on the physical, psychological and socio-economic front and differences which makes them unique. Therefore every individual has to pretty much decide and mould his life accordingly on his own. There cannot be a single goal and single path for all individuals. One goal and one path or means to achieve it for everyone is improbable. The goal that Kanakadasa had set for himself could not be envisaged by others during his period. Goal and path to achieve that is distinct for every human being.</p>
		<p>Can I identify the most appropriate goal for myself drawing inspiration from experiences of life or with help of a Guru (teacher) or through study of great books? The answer to this is all the above sources are like a huge super market. Supermarket is stuffed with variety of goods from groceries to garments, technology products to home furnishings etc. We all visit and shop based on our needs and ability to buy (money available for spend). Likewise we need to select the goal and path to achieve that by weighing the situation we are in and the competency one has. Guru or Books or experiences of life only are raw materials and function as a direction post helping the individual with various options. But, we are the individuals who need to achieve that goal and walk the path to achieve it and therefore we need to exercise our discretion here.</p>
		<p>Goal gets built incrementally and can never be a onetime exercise. When we are in the house our goal is the foot of the hill, once we reach the foot the hill-top will be the goal, as we reach the hill-top, temple on the hill becomes the goal and once you reach the entrance of the temple, getting to the sanctum sanctorum becomes the goal. So goal is essentially a series of goals which gets built in this fashion. As and when we progress towards achieving a goal, a higher goal calls to be conquered. The most important process in this is identifying the first goal. In which direction should we set forth our journey becomes the fundamental question that needs to be addressed.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
