<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-005">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Human Purpose</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">F</span>or a human being there could be four good intentions or purposes as identified by the spiritual leaders which are i) Dharma – righteousness, duty, morality ii) Artha – wealth, prosperity iii) Kama – wish, desire iv) Moksha – liberation. Human desires, thoughts and efforts are innumerable. Whatever they may be they can be classified under any one of them. Out of these four the first three are applicable to any individual who is leading a householder’s life.</p>
		<ul class="lower-roman">
			<li>
				<p>Dharma – means good conduct – it is the blossoming of the soul. We already have seen as how do we identify or define something as good. The conduct of ours which causes no harm to any individual around us, which can beautify the life of others and in the process can beautify our own life, can be termed as good conduct i.e. dharma. It should have the capability to nurture everyone’s life not of a single individual. It should also help him to uplift himself and maintain equilibrium with the society. Dharma encompasses truth, purity, righteousness &amp; empathy. Likewise it is inclusive of holy deeds such as mediation, offering prayer, rituals, sacrifices, charity &amp; social responsibility. It is challenging to comprehend the meaning of dharma in the classical context but its forms are cognizable to the mental faculty of common people. For many civilizations it has stood its ground, grown and has become widely recognized. Manu’s following words serve as the standard for Dharma:</p>
				<p class="myquote">
					Dhriti Kshama Damo Asteyam Shaucham Indriyanigrahah<br />
					Dheer Vidya Satyam Akrodho Dashakam Dharma Lakshanam
				</p>
				<p>The ten important features of Dharma being : (1) Dhriti – Patience, (2) Kshama – Forgiveness, (3) Damah – Self Control, (4) Asteya – Not Stealing, (5) Shaucha – Purity, (6) Indriya Nigraha – Sense Control, (7) Dhi – Intellect, (8) Vidya – Learning/ Knowledge, (9) Satya – Truth, (10) Akrodha – Absence of Anger.</p>
			</li>
			<li>Artha (Wealth) – Artha represents money, land, gold, stones and other forms of wealth. If the right order for life is dharma then food and clothing form the foundation of it. The ways and means to earn this is in dharma. But wealth has the inherent characteristic to command things. Some kinds of foods have the ability to provide strength but they need to be consumed in limit. If we consume more we get intoxicated and so is the case with wealth. If we accumulate more than what is required for our right living then it leads to intoxication and ultimately loose dharma. So to create wealth in such a fashion is a duty according to dharma. Vedas therefore suggest not abstaining from creation of such wealth: “Boothyaiyna pramaditavyam, tatho me shriyamaavah”</li>
			<li>
				<p>Kama - Kama means desire. It is the desire for comfort and happiness more than the admiration of life. Love, Friendship, high quality food, beauty, music, dance, and movies are all different aspects of desire. Like how a person who indulges in creation of wealth can be led to eventually deviation from dharma (righteousness) same would result in over indulgence in these desires. Desire which is unharmful has a significant place in the system of dharma. Enjoying comfort is no sin and so is experiencing happiness, but one cannot forget dharma.</p>
				<p>Both wealth and desire need to function in a well-defined boundary, which means there is enough of freedom for one to exercise. Both of these are origin points for development of mental faculty and human efforts. This influences the creation and growth of human civilization which encompasses science, commerce, occupation, industries, technology, social order &amp; relationship between societies. If wealth and Kama help in expansion of life it is dharma which provides the required treatment to keep this expansion healthy.</p>
			</li>
			<li>Moksha (Salvation) – Salvation or Nirvana as it is called in the recent times is a subject which is farfetched for experience of humans. The above three are cognizable by us in our daily life. Moksha belongs to a different class all together and gets a distinct treatment. It is specially attached to saints, individuals detached from society and spiritual leaders. Dharma, Artha and Kama create a connection and bonding to the society we all live in. This connection over a period of time makes us go through turmoil of experiences. This is the difficulty of bonding and getting released from such kind of bonding which passes through ages is salvation. For humans the thought of the supreme soul and consistent meditation on it, provides a protective shield against the sufferings he undergoes. An individual who recognizes and comprehends that supreme energy which is omnipresent has the ability to understand the value of the materialistic world and stay detached from such kind of superficial existence. The attainment of such a supreme state is called Moksha or salvation. For the purpose of this book, Moksha is not so important but has been touched upon has one of the four human purposes.</li>
		</ul>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
