<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-010">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Life’s Enthusiasm</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">W</span>e should first identify the lacuna or defect in us which upon correction can lead us to eradicate all other difficulties. This can act only through ruthless act of introspection or self discovery. If we do this we will recognize that for generations together we have rendered our mind weak, unwisely detached from action and have lost all the courage and energy. We have to transform this weak mind to a stronger one.</p>
		<p>It is also not that there have never been attempts to improve the quality of life. India has seen visionaries such as Sir M Visweswaraiah, Dr. Verghese Kurien, Vikram Sarabhai, Prof. Satish Dhawan, Dr. APJ Abdul Kalam and others who have effectively used the government structure, system and policies to reach out to common man and uplift their quality of life. We have created world class organizations in the last two decades in areas of Information Technology &amp; Bio-technology through leadership of Narayan Murthy, Azim Premji, Kiran Mazumdar Shaw and Ratan Tata to name a few. There is also a huge spurt in the entrepreneurship across sectors which is an encouraging sign and can hold a promising future for this country. But, what is more important is for a nation with current size of population and ever growing, there needs to be a multifold effort and reforms that need to take place in the hearts and minds of every citizen of this country. Any country which has progressed well has done not merely because of its leaders but the positive energy kindled in every heart and mind of its citizen which working towards a larger common vision.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
