<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-011">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">A Formidable Story</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">I</span>n the city of Kalyanpur there lived a wealthy person who had constructed a huge bungalow and had got a well dug in its premises. They couldn’t find water in spite of having dug for 70 – 80 ft in the ground. As he was pondering what to do with it, situation had arrived for him to meet his lawyer friend in city of Chennai and at the same time this friend was considering to settle down in Kalyanpur for reasons of health. The friend asked the wealthy person whether he could help him to locate a nice bungalow for him and also insisted that he needed one which has a well that could be used for some religious activities. The wealthy person responded said that he was aware of a newly constructed bungalow of someone he knew and it indeed had a well whose water was very sweet. So the friend indicated to him that he would visit the following Saturday for looking at the bungalow in Kalyanpur. Meanwhile the wealthy person put all the effort to fill the well to a substantial level with clean and sweet water. Finally the bungalow was sold for a huge amount. Within weeks of the friend occupying the bungalow, water in the well started drying up and after few more weeks the water completely dried up. How long can a well have water which has been artificially pumped from an external source?</p>
		<p>A human’s life and country’s prospect is also similar. They cannot sustain and grow from the support received by friends or the external borrowings from neighbors. Energy needs to take birth and grow from within or else any magnitude of help received from outside will not help. Like spring of water in the well, energy and enthusiasm needs to constantly spring out and drive the individual and the country.</p>
		<p>It is bewildering to see only few human beings taking such a initiative and leaders of country not having a big heart and higher aspirations to accomplish that is beneficial for everyone.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
