<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-013">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Era of Loss of Courage</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">L</span>ike this when different religions which started and continued their journeys in different directions it might have witnessed drastic changes. Any religion or philosophy cannot grow getting confined inside a cave as it has to set its sight on the human civilization. Religion is there to create a social order in this world and world should not be created for sake of religion. Every establisher of religion may have found the necessity for a new religion by observing the social conditions present then. The greatest motivation for him was from the dissatisfaction seen in the society. There seems to be a major shakeup which took place around 2500 years in the social system of our ancestors and this could be the reason for transforming a mind which was having a winning attitude to one of losing one.</p>
		<p>There could be many reasons which could have led to such a big change in the social system. Natural disasters, politically led activities, invasions and attacks of the foreigners, prolonged famine may have contributed to shattering of the human mind. When the mind mellowed down a great person may have taken birth whose high intellect or mesmerizing oratory skills or noble conduct or some other human influence could have risen him to fame and he could have shown a new vision and have led people in that direction. This should have occurred even before the era of Mahavir or Gautama Buddha. Voice of joy and happiness of the Aryan race came down and voice of helplessness gained momentum.</p>
		<p>The other reason could have been prolonged indulgence in the enjoyment of victory and luxury leading to lack of practice of positive energy giving way to hardships and difficulties and eventually creating a changed mindset. Let us all recollect a common experience of the world. A person who was born poor attains wealth and fame in society because of his intellectual capabilities and physical effort. When he dies he leaves the family in the wealth and comfort created by him. If we assume that his children also engage in further growth of wealth, in the following generations of his grandchildren or great-grandchildren they start neglecting the primary attributes for creation of this wealth and also fail to put their individual effort. Further, all these result in enjoyment of created wealth, animosity among the family members, unhappiness finally getting engulfed in poverty and decline. As is the famous quote “Seeds of failure are embedded in the greatest moments of success” so will be the attitude of people who have been gifted with success and wealth rather than they would have deservingly earned. It could be therefore suggested that our ancestors who had toiled hard to create a mind of strength and courage was uprooted by the later generations and developed a mindset of defeat.</p>
		<p>Long before the period of Sri Adi Shankaracharya (prior to 800 AD), enthusiasm had decreased in life and thinking such as this living world is inferior, human life gets afflicted with difficulties, human body and sensual pleasures are condemning, enjoyment is sin and not to be expected and if there is anything that is real it is the external world and even superior to this is Moksha or salvation, had crept in.</p>
		<p>“End this human birth and cycle of such creations” is the song that is being taught to us by our elders.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
