<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-015">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Courageous Intellect</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">A</span> journey which embarked to seek victory and satisfy aspirations of life by Vedas gradually led to think about external philosophy and divided it into two branches. One branch which relied on logic reached desert and dried up. The other one has travelled like a flood encompassing everything on its way. It is our duty for us to research and identify the river which existed before this branch out and lead it into our life. Therefore let us look at the Upanishads.</p>
		<p>One is Ishopanishad which states as:</p>
		<p>“This world is embedded in God. Therefore all this is property of God. In this context you should not presume anything as yours; you should use it treating all this as his divine gift. You are entitled to receive that based on the work you perform. For that reason you need to perform well. Give me the mind to live for hundred years by performing the work with all wisdom and enthusiasm and eat the fruits gifted by the Lord.”</p>
		<p>The other is Taittiriya Upanishad which says as follows:</p>
		<p>“Be cautious not to commit mistake in comprehending truth or speaking truth. Behave similarly with respect to Dharma. Be alert in achieving whatever is good. Conduct yourself well in the righteous manner in creation of wealth, with respect to elders, with relatives and friends and let your actions be filled with wise knowledge. Let you create abundantly food grains and other materials required for life. All things which have form and substance are all part of God. Therefore if you consider all transactions and business as service to God, divine gift of God then you will experience and reach abode of God.</p>
		<p>Bhagavad-Gita which is considered as the essence (or summarized text) of all Upanishads says the following:</p>
		<p>“If you have to fight for Dharma, go out, stand and fight; do not run away from situation. Dharma means principle of holding all living things in a state of equilibrium. If you fight for your personal benefit or cause you will get imprisoned in it. A person who sacrifices the attitude of 'I', 'It’s mine', 'My happiness', 'My welfare', 'My prestige', 'My name' and works for the well being of everyone will have all his obstacles removed and enable growth of his soul. Entire world is filled with Brahman. If you work with intention of benefiting the society and as an offering to God, it will bring you prosperity. Therefore lead your life for the world; experience and tolerate victory and loss with equal measure. Analyze the situation and act. Work and be victorious as a disciple of Lord Shiva.”</p>
		<p>Such a mental attitude is what is primarily required.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
