<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-016">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Importance of Life</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">L</span>ife is a huge subject. It is most sacred and deserves all respect. For a life to germinate and take its birth the creator would have made many preparations prior to it. We need to constantly rethink about it. In plants, in lizards, snakes, reptiles, fishes and other animals there are strange mechanisms devised by nature to enable reproduction. Human body is an astonishing machine. It is filled with chemical elements which drive it, chemicals such as human mind. It is created with various such mechanisms, hard labor of patience and love by God. To call that inferior and ignoring is not a wisely act. To respect this life and lead it to a good position with all possible efforts is a dharmishta (follower of dharma). Every life is a hidden treasure of innumerable energies. A life, whose such hidden or inherent energy gets enriched, strengthened and becomes available for welfare of mankind will become successfully complete. Therefore it is inappropriate to be unenthusiastic with respect to life. There has to be devotion and interest with respect to all matters of life.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
