<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-017">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Inappropriate Detachment</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">S</span>ongs of philosophy, hymns about various gods, verses written by servants of god all preach detachment which is inappropriate and easily attainable. Such a detachment is restricted to words and of complete inaction. It only helps to build laziness, cowardly seclusion and detachment born out of inability. “Nothing is possible from me; everything is controlled and managed by someone else. What is the use of you struggling? Do not strain yourselves unnecessarily; just sit and keep meditating on God” is the common thing preached by divine songs of god. Added to this are the songs of dejection which proclaim “what is the point in comforting this human body equivalent to log of wood?” In the very first instance people are facing hardships and are subjected to poverty and on top of it if this so called divine songs preach “do not worry about what’s happening, you be where you are as what can you accomplish you are just a human being” they get easily influenced to them leaving behind their responsibilities and duties. Such is the intoxication provided by the commoner’s philosophy.</p>
		<p>Detachment means to forego the selfish interest in worldly things. “Nothing is mine, everything belongs to God”, not to beg for ones’ own comfort, not troubling any one is real detachment and such a detachment is purified by wisdom. But, for a person where there is nothing in this world that belongs to him and is toiling hard daily to satiate his stomach, where can he find detachment? If he wants to have detachment from life (breadth or life giving force) the life itself does not allow happening and demands to be with the human body. Apart from life there is nothing that a poor person can sacrifice and be detached from life. If you have not kept anything for yourself then there is nothing to be sacrificed and so a poor man does not have anything at his disposal for sacrifice. Preaching detachment to such a person is futile and would be adding to agony of his life. Feeding the patient with food which is tasteful to tongue and advising poor people to sit idle would be leading them to misery and not out of it.</p>
		<p>We should first stop cribbing about our Fate and develop a courageous outlook. Bring smiles back to our face giving up crying, weak and loosing mind should be replaced with intellect to win, cowardly detachment should go and valiant effort should come in.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
