<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-018">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">What do we mean by Devotion to God?</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">D</span>oes it mean that we do not require devotion to God? It is a redundant question. No one is saying that we do not require devotion to God. But, the question here is in understanding the right kind of devotion. Devotion means display of holy ash, vermilion, necklace of holy beads, traditional trident, sacred pendants is the thinking of many people. Endless chanting of Rama, Shiva (Hindu Gods) and singing holy songs at temples are the main characteristics of devotion is the opinion of few. These practices and principles are bad and are futile is not anyone’s contention. But our stance is these are not sufficient. Let there be singing of divine songs and wearing of holy objects as this might provide some kind of solace and strength to few human minds. Just as we decorate our houses with colorful paints, flowers and leaves during festival and auspicious occasions, holy chanting and ornamentation can bring some radiance to life. But decoration alone does not make it a festival there needs to be some good food prepared in the house for the occasion. This means devotion needs to have more of wisdom driven efforts along with holy chanting. Devotion does not mean mental turbulence alone but also include human efforts. Devotion means an emotion which originates from heart and emerges out of our throat is an old feeling. Devotion is energy of soul that originates in our head and gets out through our hands is our opinion. The seat of devotion is heart is a thinking of past, devotion’s one foot is in heart and the other is in our intellect is our thinking. Devotion should reach God is the belief of past, devotion is created by God, he is a witness to it and it should reach the human world is our opinion. It does not suffice if devotion evokes good words from our mouth but it should elicit good work from us. That good work should have the capability to serve larger part of society we live in. We believe human effort is main component of devotion.</p>
		<p>If we observe in this limelight just as we regard Purandaradasa, Kanakadasa, Saint Kabir, Basavanna, Nijaguna Shivayogi, as great devotees in the same league are Kempegowda (founder of Bengaluru), Dadabhai Naoroji, Ranade, Rangacharlu, Gokhale, Tilak, Gandhi, JC Bose, P C Ray, J N Tata, Sir M Visweswaraiah who have rendered yeoman services to society. People who have created better constitution and government, who have worked for upliftment of poor, people who were responsible for spread of science and technology, establishment of research and development centers thereby fostering newer technologies, developed new machines and intellectual property for benefit of society should also be considered as devotees. If one’s devotion is expressed through tears, devotion of other’s is through strengthened efforts.</p>
		<p>We should approve mental attitude which is supported by science and human capabilities that is responsible for such a cognizable devotion.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
