<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-019">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">What is Science?</h1>
		<p class="myquote"><em>In their essence there can be no conflict between science and religion. Science is a reliable method of finding truth. Religion is the search for a satisfying basis for life…. Yet a world that has Science needs, as never before, the inspiration that religion has to offer…. Beyond the nature taught by science is the spirit that gives meaning to life.</em></p>
		<p class="quote-author"><strong>-<em>Dr. Arthur H. Compton</em></strong></p>
		<p><span class="bigletter">T</span>he purpose of science is to question about this universe, experiment, research and search for answers to why is this? How is this? The knowledge that results out of such a search is Science. Without becoming a blind faith, knowledge which originates of independent thinking and review is Science.</p>
		<p>Students of Science need to work primarily in three areas:</p>
		<ol>
			<li>Different forms of object</li>
			<li>Classification of objects</li>
			<li>Inter-relationship between objects</li>
		</ol>
		<ol>
			<li>Every object in this universe needs to be analyzed for its form, size, weight, color, properties, fundamental elements which the object is made of and their behavioral nature. So, the fundamental duty of science is gathering data of each of the above parameters and analyzing them.</li>
			<li>Second duty of science is classification of objects based on the properties and creating taxonomy. At the broad level they can be classified as living and non-living. In living you have terrestrial, aquatic, amphibians, living in air; in terrestrial we have humans, animals, insects and so on as specific classes; in non-living we have metals, salts, gases, fuels and so forth as special classes. Such a systematic classification enables us to reasonably understand and recognize the basic features and properties of most of objects.</li>
			<li>
				<p>Such diversely classified objects influence each other by enhancing, negating, decreasing the fundamental properties of the other object and work of science is to reason out as to how and why this happens. Such a mutually influencing phenomenon between objects has transformed this universe into a great place and has divinely held together. The intricate study of such inter-relationship has been helpful tool and utility in our daily life.</p>
				<p>Science is such a vast subject which is growing daily and ever expanding. The main feature of science is its independent examination of subject. Fearless and Unbiased research of Universe is Science.</p>
				<p>Inter-relationships between objects are infinite and therefore there is a limitation in our effort for understanding this as it is. Therefore science needs to endlessly continue its pursuit of truth and can never claim that it has reached its goal. Such a goal is a temporary destination with respect to time, environment and capabilities of the researcher.</p>
			</li>
		</ol>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
