<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-021">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Limitation of Science</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">N</span>obody can claim everything is possible through Science. There are many questions beyond the realm of Science and is left unanswered. The mystery surrounding the basic tenet of life and mind is yet unconquered by science. With all the technology advancements in science in Europe it couldn’t prevent the world wars and destruction to mankind. Everybody agrees that only strengthening Science is insufficient for positive progress of society and at the same time we need to agree that we can’t let go of it.</p>
		<p>Science is just a tool like Weapon or Wealth. Weapon can be used to protect lives and at the same time is put into use by criminals to kill; weapon by itself is neither good nor bad. Good or bad is dependent on the hands in which it rests. Wealth similarly can be used for charity and to create violence it all depends on the individual prudence.</p>
		<p>Just because a few ill intentioned people use wealth for wrong causes no one aspires to be poor. As weapons have been put into use for mass destruction by Western countries we cannot refrain from building such technologies.</p>
		<p>Goodness without strength is a cry of helplessness. Mother has natural love towards her child but when the child is ill; her crying will do no good or cure its illness. At that point of time presence of mind of mother to get an able doctor saves child. It is not mother’s cry but power of science which proves to be appropriate. We first require wisdom than the God’s kindness. How did the difficulty or challenge arise and what is the right response for it is result of scientific research. We should therefore take up all our life’s questions and review it in most scientific manner.</p>
		<p>Ethiopia, historically known as Abyssinia was a country with good citizens whose patriotism was no lesser than any other country’s citizens. They were naturally courageous people but all they lacked was scientific advancement. On October 3<sup>rd</sup> 1935, Italian army under leadership of Benito Mussolini attacked Ethiopia. War experts had predicted that Mussolini would require four lakh soldiers and four years to conquer this country. But on May 5<sup>th</sup> 1936, Italy was successful in establishing its dominance over Ethiopia. Ethiopia had natural defense in its mountains, forests, valleys and land terrain which made it difficult for soldiers but Italy with a small army strongly supported by latest defense equipments such as aircrafts and other machinery was victorious in seven months. The greatest lesson learnt from this is no amount of natural resources and ability will be sufficient without backing up of Science and Technology.</p>
		<p>Even today in few parts of India when they are attacked by diseases such as Cholera, Chicken Pox people in villages rush to temple of goddess rather than getting it attended by physicians. One needs to understand that without disturbing one’s faith it is equally important to get help of science.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
