<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-022">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Pump and Pray</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">F</span>ew Englishmen were travelling in a mid-sized ship. The ship suddenly encountered huge waves and storm which made water rush into the ship. Sailors got frightened by this and becoming directionless went to Father who was sitting on deck and sought help. Father asked them what should he do and everyone said that they all need to pray together and he should lead them. Father quickly responded why they had become so dejected and ignored them. After sometime the voices of sailors seeking help became even more prominent. Father than advised, Pray but, keep pumping the water and pray. This may just be a story but lesson for us is “God helps those who help themselves”. Self effort and God’s help are interwoven and they cannot stand alone. Human beings have been gifted by God with intellect. This entrusts him with responsibility to effectively use this intellect. But men cannot shift this responsibility back to God’s shoulders it is uncalled for. Men have to execute their responsibility and leave the rest to God.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
