<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-023">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Science – Boon or Bane</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">A</span>s we require medicine to cure us from diseases, likewise application of science is essential to solve every other challenge of life. We have effectively used this technology to provide information for farmers in selection of seeds, fertilizers, irrigation techniques, and climatic warnings and how to preserve the harvest. This has helped us to transform the yield in several years but there is far more scope for penetration of tools and techniques for continued growth.</p>
		<p>Garment industry has transformed itself in last six decades of independence from traditional industry to use of sophisticated machinery. Human power with textile machineries has made it possible for India to become leading exporters ($ 24 billion in 201011).</p>
		<p>India today has witnessed global manufacturing and services industries set up their research and production facilities which have boosted economic lives of its people and access to latest technologies.</p>
		<p>In this context we have to recognize and stress the role of teachers across country to create a sharp mindset of adapting to Science and Technology for betterment of society. We need to have a scientific order and temperament in every household.</p>
		<p>World has witnessed unimaginable spurt in newer technologies in last three decades as internet and mobile are gaining ground in every house. We have successfully used this to make travel arrangements, take timely medical help and make business worldwide sitting in the remote corners of this country. We are yet to see unleash of far better technologies which can improve our quality of life.</p>
		<p>In the same breadth what we also have to bring to our cognizance is just as we see Science can achieve greater things it is not free of boundary. Science is more an extrinsic phenomenon and can change things external to us. It has more power and control on our senses. But, what is farfetched to these sensual organs is our inner world. We can only take a guess at working of inner world but will not be able to measure through scientific instruments. If we break open our brain we will not be able to find any trace of our thought process and nor there is a way to get a microscopic view of what is happening in an individual’s brain. In this manner what is transacting in one’s heart is only a guess but not visible to anyone to prove it. This makes it difficult for science to answer to take us to root of our life.</p>
		<p>In the beginning of Scientific Era, looking at success received by Science, few people felt that there is nothing impossible that cannot be achieved by science. But, in 50-60 years it was realized that it is inappropriate to have such over ambitious goals. There are many mysteries which are inexplicable through Science is an accepted fact by many renowned scientists. There are no theories in science to explain concept of soul, God, Karma (causal act - cycle of cause and effect). There are many scientists who are experimenting around this but it is hard to find a consensus among them to define any of this. There have been more of logical arguments and counter arguments. Subject which is invisible to eyes of science is philosophy which is nothing but Vedanta or spiritual science. It deals with God, Good, Evil (Bad), Heaven, Hell, life after death, interrelationship between souls, result of previous action, salvation and other such mystic things.</p>
		<p>In this way there is something mysterious that is external to science but attached to it. To be more precise, Science in itself holds many mysterious things which are not alien to Vedas or Vedanta. There are things which are explicit and implicit in sway of God. The supreme object is having form as well is formless. According to Vedanta it is mutable and immutable. Accordingly there are things which human intellect can comprehend and which are incognizant. It is our duty to stretch ourselves as much as possible putting in the best efforts. It is also our duty to acknowledge and accept those things as God’s intent which is unattainable in spite of his efforts. In a wise man’s path both scientific effort and patience to destiny are interwoven. In his life courage and detachment stay connected. For his faith, self-confidence is one eye and the other is devotion to God.</p>
		<p>We can visualize a situation which involves power of science, devotion to God and human intellect. If someone in our house is inflicted with a disease what do we do? We will consult among family and friends and visit a capable and efficient doctor. The ability to consult, search and identify the appropriate doctor is human intellect. After thorough examination of the patient, doctor prescribes the necessary medicine and advices him to consume the same in a prescribed manner. This is power of Science. We advice the patient to trust the doctor and follow doctor’s prescription as what is required to get cured along with medicines is the mental strength and belief in doctor’s advice. Mind has control over body and hence they also represent a part of medicine. With this sentiment our ancestors said :</p>
		<p><em>“Oushadham Jaahnavi Toyam Vaidyo Narayano Harihi”</em>. This medicine is holy water (Ganges) and doctor who has prescribed it is God himself. This is a congregation of Intellect-Science-Devotion.</p>
		<p>As we have one dimension as human effort, second as the scientific knowledge, the third dimension is morality. That is Goodness and that is <em>dharma</em> (righteousness). <em>Dharma</em> or Righteousness is a conduct which results in reduction of torment among the living beings and increase of mutual co-operation in life. All living beings whose human conduct follows an order or assumes a well accepted social relation is <em>dharma</em>. If scientific intellect combines itself with consciousness of <em>dharma</em> then there will be glow of life.</p>
		<p>As Ethiopia is a witness to a country which was high on moral grounds or righteousness but lacked scientific temperament or knowledge, so was Germany in pre-world war era which had all the necessary scientific knowledge but lacked righteousness. Both of them lead to disasters. The constant war to own most powerful weapons by countries in World and cold war in other countries is a proof for scientific advancement without righteousness.</p>
		<p>India fortunately has traversed this path in a well balanced model of scientific growth coupled with disarmament for destruction. But what is disheartening is to see sporadic events of violence in various parts of country or using the scientific advancements for unlawful benefits. We have become susceptible to use ways and means which appear easy to be employed to gain on personal front. We easily emulate their mannerisms and behavior that looks convenient but fail to understand the core values present in their philosophy or their ethos.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
