<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-024">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Distress of Villages</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">T</span>here is an important thing that needs to be said to people residing in villages. People speaking at political rallies and news journalists have a practice to describe rural citizens as highly innocent. They are uneducated, therefore are innocent, free of deceit and are honest are the general praise showered on them. This is a matter of exaggeration. People who graze cattle are not embedded with kindness and innocence of them. There was a time when our ancestors did their transactions keeping Sun and Moon as the witness, taking oath keeping one’s hand on the other and were retracting to swear untruth in front of idols in temple. That era is far behind us now. There are ample people who are aware of law and few lawyers in every nook and corner of the country. Lawyers are dime and dozen who offer advice at convenience and therefore people in villages take the superficial knowledge of law as sufficient for them. Over and above the ethical conduct has two dangers I) they are economically backward and there is a natural urge to somehow make money as there is saying <em>“Daridra doshena karothi papam”</em>, because of poverty we are instigated to create sin. II) Sense of social ignominy is also less among ruralites than the urbanites. Conduct of the urbanites cannot escape the public attention and getting into news. Transactions in villages happen secretly and are never published. For these reasons untruth, deceit, cunningness and superficial behavior are not uncommon in villages. One can find lot of such evidence lying in courts rural areas. There are ample incidents of group clashes and violence which have retarded the growth of villages. All these are not part of moral conduct.</p>
		<p>As we showcase and uphold the bad character of ruralites we should not forget that their teachers and leaders are urbanites. As the universal opinion prevails that urbanites are most civilized and supreme beings, it is but natural for our rural population to emulate them. Our urban society’s main feature is to dwell in glory of wealth - which strongly believes money alone has the capability to buy anything in this world and lives with this false prestige.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
