<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-025">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Agrarian Economy</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">I</span>n Agrarian economy food grains was very important. The power of notes and coins was not so dominant then. Sumptuous food, clothing enough to cover body, treasury filled with grains, barn filled with cattle was the sole purpose of our ancestors and today’s villagers believe money is strength and their purpose is to have cash in hand and cash in bank. They have learnt this from urbanites. Person who first created money a mesmerizing tool also needs to be credited with creation of all evil things of the civilization. The atrocities and clashes that have taken place because of this person has not been caused by no other individual. In agrarian based economy such kind of destruction is not possible as grains cannot be hoarded for a longtime as it will get rotten and no one can hoard large quantities escaping notice of others. One has to utilize the food grains in one form or the other. But, when currency rules the economy, one has the ability to reserve the wealth in whatever form and wherever possible in most secretive manner. Materialistic comforts and luxury which cannot be purchased through grains can be easily obtained by money. This creates a greed for money and desire to acquire wealth by whatever means. Government officers, Lawyers, Professors, Businessman and every other class of people have all chosen this path. So, how long can our friends living in villages be free of such thoughts and action?</p>
		<p>For creation of wealth, people living in cities choose different means and employ various methods which are not easily visible. People living in villages employ other methods which are little crude and noticeable. Deceit groups, rivalry, disputes, corruption, pomp and show are present in wealthy societies but well disguised in the aristocratic fashion. But in rural areas they come across as presented badly. The root of all human beings is one and therefore sanctification as to happen not only in rural parts of country but also to elite class of the urban society. Truth, Honesty, fear of conscience and righteousness are fundamental for development. Until we toil hard and grow these fundamentals it is unlikely for us to see progress in our society, Europe serves as evidence to fact wealth created on immoral grounds deceives peace of mind.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
