<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-029">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Purification of Soul</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">S</span>uch a discretionary judgment occurs because of worldly experience or from examination of history. That is Purification (Samskara) or civilization. The objective of civilization is twofold a) set free the feelings of the heart and spread it widely b) to highlight the discriminations in the value of various material objects. The tools available for such a refinement in life are mainly five:</p>
		<p>i) Family – It is the heat that softens the selfish and self centered attitude of I (Me). It uses the heat of pride of being associated to Parents, Siblings, Spouse and Children to melt the entanglements of the mind, seal the cracks, strengthen the bonds, make us cry, laugh, think, perspire, relax and ripe. Therefore family is considered one among the three afflictions arising from deity or fate. House becomes the first school of discipline.</p>
		<p>ii) Occupation – This places us in a position which is distant from our known ones and subjects us to various challenges. Our inner strength nurtures and grows because of the exercise at this place. This second school of discipline fosters the enrichment of experience and improves brilliance of our nature.</p>
		<p>A person, who aspires to live well, will first identify a job or occupation, learn it, believe it that alone will help him to live and will try to excel in that. This excellence arises not because of his position in society or his education but the manner in which he performs in that job. The designation or status of job is irrelevant, what are more important is the intelligence, devotion and capability towards the neat execution of the job.</p>
		<p>In Mahabharata, Yudhishtira (Dharmaraya) was questioned by the demigod (Yaksha): “Where is the dwelling place of righteousness (dharma)?”. Yudhishtira responded saying <em>“DaakshamekaPadam Dharmam”</em> (In the work we do we need to exhibit capability, wisdom and skill, that is the dwelling place of righteousness.) We have seen lack of such serious commitment to work and more of eye washing attitude. Nature performs her duties irrespective of being supervised or observed by any one. Beautiful flowers blossom in completely uninhabited forests not in anticipation of any appreciation but because it is its nature. Likewise if we take up the job that we have obtained and do it with all the required commitment and intelligence, our own reputation will grow.</p>
		<p>iii) Literary Arts – This is my biggest school. If our life has to be appropriate with respect to family, occupation and other fields, education about literary arts is very much needed. There are three sections in this:</p>
		<ol class="lower-alpha">
			<li>Literature – This includes Poetry, Prose, Drama, essays, stories, discourses and various such works. It brings out the numerous emotions of joy, sorrow, anger, despair which is hidden deep inside our mind and allows it to empathize with others experiences and gel with them. It further presents to us various beauties and variations in life and compels us to analyze about them. There are different levels of beauty and Literature instigates us to differentiate among them.</li>
			<li>History – Throughout the world how people lived; what hardships they faced; in times of misery and prosperity how their minds functioned; how people reacted to words of wisdom; how it gets catalyzed to provocative talks; how great men influence behavior of others; overall how people are subjected to fate; what proportion of life is achieved through human efforts – it showcases all these and aids us in our evaluation through wisdom.</li>
			<li>Performing Arts – This includes Music, Painting, Sculpture, Dance, Movies and other such things which make us emote. This aids Literature. They act on our hearts and bring to our experience all those emotions which are part of human nature. It helps us to develop empathy in our life.</li>
		</ol>
		<p>iv)Religion – This is in position of supreme teacher for everyone. It is our faith towards God and conduct that is appropriate to it. There are none who do not align to this concept. It exists even with individuals who dwell in forests. The concept of heaven and hell resides on this premise. Generally our conduct is due to fear of God. In this way it influences the thinking of sin and good deed, thereby rectifying various practices of religion and society. In world history the influence of religion is immeasurable, in sum total this is something that we can’t ignore, neither it is necessary for us to ignore it. Supreme devotion is as pure as the love of young child; it is unconditional; full with happiness; it involves commitment to one’s religion and no animosity to other religions; having an attitude that the truth we realize may be realized by others in different form. Thirdly religion as to inculcate the mindset that we are all children of same God and need to live like brothers. One of the devotee has expressed :</p>
		<p class="verse">
			<em>Maatha cha parvathi devi pitha devo maheshwarha</em><br />
			<em>Baandhavo shiva bhakthanam swadesham bhuvanathrayam.</em>
		</p>
		<p>(My mother is Goddess Parvathi and Father is Lord Shiva, all my relatives are devotees of Shiva and all three worlds are my world.) Which means compassion, service to community, charity are all live forms of righteousness.</p>
		<p>Does this mean we do not require temples, prayers, idols, photos, meditation, chanting? All these need to be there as they help constantly remind and strengthen our beliefs. Through prayers and meditation the mind acquires tranquility and purity. Therefore all of us can observe and practice that suits our mental setup as it is good. Along with that we also need to take the broad mindedness and accommodative qualities of our religion to develop worldly brotherhood.</p>
		<p class="myquote">
			<strong>Distill your mind every day,</strong><br />
			<strong>Reconciling the good and bad deeds committed every day.</strong><br />
			<strong>Segregate the right and wrong,</strong><br />
			<strong>Uprooting the roots of the wrong.</strong><br />
			<strong>Following the righteous path,</strong><br />
			<strong>Meditating on the lotus feet of supreme soul.</strong><br />
			<strong>Renouncing the worldly pleasures,</strong><br />
			<strong>Experience the supreme soul.</strong><br />
			<strong>Realizing and discovering it within you.</strong>
		</p>
		<p>Daily examination of soul, search of mind, every second thought of righteousness, welfare of the world is all attributes of devotion to god.</p>
		<p>Whatever is the greatness and accomplishments of Science it has its own limitation it cannot help you to transcend in land of spirituality. If India committed fallacy of forgetting science thinking about spirituality, Europe committed the blunder of forgetting spirituality dwelling in science. Therefore, Europeans believed materialistic things and pleasure superior to spirituality and ventured into wars more often. If peace has to prevail in the entire world and give up the fear of terror, devotion to science has to be evaluated with spiritual wisdom.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
