<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-032">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Social Service</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">F</span>orm of God and Soul will become evident only through experience. This experience is attained only through inner sight and this is achievable only through blend of Mind and wisdom. Light emerging out of Wisdom and emotions of heart together give rise to a new light. Wisdom can be obtained through studies of various subjects but light that as to emerge out of heart has to come through interactions with society and not through self study. One should practice sympathy for difficulties of world. He has to participate in sharing the burden of the society. In process of working towards it he has to decrease his narrow mindedness and expand boundary of his soul. Only contact of society will enable him to purify his soul which is responsible for inner sight.</p>
		<p>It is easy to sing “God is our Father; we are all one”. If we are to realize the true meaning of that in our lives; we need to engage ourselves in some social activity which does not involve yielding to petty favor requests of friends and relatives and our selfish acts. For this activity, we should not hold ourselves back until someone invites us but we have to voluntarily search for opportunities to engage. This is the path for expansion of our soul and easing us out of smaller troubles which could entrap us.</p>
		<p>In our country there are two major avenues to engage in public activity namely i) Political, ii) Societal.</p>
		<p>i) Politics involves thousands of things which are to be performed for good of the country which means subject related to welfare of our co-citizens. In this regard every alert human being has certain responsibilities which are the duties of citizen. The duties of citizen are mainly two fold: I) to abide by the law and order of the state ii) to continuously examine, review and express the opinion regarding function of the government. Honest conformity and Independent review are two major parts of duty of citizen.</p>
		<p>Many people conform to law and order of the state but this is result of long practice not born out of intellect. This is a blind conformation but not arising out of independent thinking. Our conformity should emerge out of our wisdom. If we thoroughly comprehend the framework and rules of constitution and if we follow them with appropriate knowledge about it then it becomes useful.</p>
		<p>We are still far behind in the action part of Political review. Review does not mean voice of anger or frustration. It needs support of knowledge and should not be biased or arising out of jealousy or animosity. In today’s cultured states rules and regulations are framed by citizen representatives. Selection of the citizen representative and supervising his actions are satisfactory is very important. It is a huge responsibility to elect the most capable and appropriate to Gram Panchayat, Municipality, State government and various other governing bodies. For this we need to have deep sense of understanding and unbiased view. It is duty of every citizen to earn such an understanding and impartial thinking. In this subject we are not in a position to state that our present customs and practices are fine.</p>
		<p>After the election, there is no hold and supervision by the people on their representatives in the government. To observe the conduct of our political leaders, review and analyze their criticism and arguments in media and provide valuable suggestions are the main aspects of citizenship. If this is not properly executed people’s say in the government will get weakened and democracy will exist for namesake without the true force that can help the nation. Therefore it is important for every citizen to pay appropriate and cautious attention towards politics.</p>
		<p>ii) Even in the social sphere there is lot of work to be done. Every village or town has one or two social bodies like the Municipality, temples, libraries, discourse centers, gymnasium, and welfare societies for improving education, health, theatre groups and such other social organizations. To become active member of such groups or form such initiatives is every individual’s duty. This leads to betterment of townships and the individual’s life gets broadened. In this process he will mingle well with the society, comprehend various individual mannerisms, mould his behavior to the society, constantly rectify oneself and expanding his mind on his own will allow his soul to grow. Social service is the daily duty related to national welfare and is the best school for education to allow growth of heart. The inspiration that is present there to research on one’s soul and opportunity to expand it is nowhere else available. The new form of electorate that needs to happen in India is through the practice of social service.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
