<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-033">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Improvement of Villages – Land Cultivation</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">W</span>e have already seen how villages are getting destroyed. Villages are becoming weaker due to attraction of urban cities. With the new age politics the village strength is being broken, in lure of the salaries and other comforts people from villages are moving to workplaces in factories or offices. In context of election, for sake of competing more crime is becoming rampant. There is scant attention towards the agricultural land. We are importing several essential food commodities from other countries. Is it required to fill politics to such an extent? Is it good for the people? Is it difficult to control the commotion during the election? All these are the prime questions. If we assume that there is certain amount of politics required, we need mechanisms to counter the ill effects of it. Agricultural practice is a profession which teaches people unity. Without friendship and co-operation it is hard to cultivate the land even for a day. Tilling, ploughing, cultivating, harvesting, cleaning, chafing, transporting all of them require man power. Cultivation is not a single person activity. It requires various farm equipment and other paraphernalia which needs to be available at right time. Even the cattle that are required at times required. In this way cultivation is a co-operative effort of many houses and that is the beauty of it. Therefore it develops humanity. High amount of automation and technology erodes this human bonding. Politics and elections only destroy the human relationships. We are trying to emulate cultures and practices of various other nations and attain peace of mind that needs to be curtailed. For this to be possible the task that needs to be accomplished by the educated class is big. People who are pensioners or who have taken voluntary retirement from services and who still have the capability to work need to take this up as their responsibility. Even in them, people who have lands that can be cultivated need to make up their minds to stay in villages and through their good conduct will have to transform the minds of the village citizens. One large co-operative movement, one festival and one social center can erode the philistine thinking of several individuals and lift their minds to a higher altitude.(In this regard it is very appropriate to remind ourselves of the Operation Flood started by Mr. Kurien which transformed life of several milk farmers). Every village or town has a place of worship. This can easily be made as center of activity to organize discourses, discussions on scriptures, village festivals and elate the beauty of them. This can easily kill the boredom of villages. The rampant transformation we have seen in the infrastructure related to transportation and communication further enables to provide any facility and entertainment that is available in urban cities to villages. This has to be enabled by the educated class first with the help of the government taking it up as a joint responsibility. The essential service that needs to be rendered to the nation today is the upliftment of villages. Upliftment here refers to number of people residing in villages, their health, physical strength, clean and tidy environment of their households, growth of their livestock, rejuvenation and development of lakes and ponds, primary education, medical facilities and above all this to control the migration of population from villages to urban cities. People who are physically and intellectually strong should stay in their respective villages and put their strength to use for the development. In order to enable this we need to adequately fill motivational factors in villages. A good society is the only medicine to bad politics. Welfare and Development of villages has to become a primary goal in Social service.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
