<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-037">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Larger Philosophy</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">I</span>f evil spirits are warded off, then it is possible to realize supreme soul. If inappropriate faith is removed from our lives then we will be able to gain wisdom of welfare. Therefore we need to first examine our individual minds and cleanse them. Baseless fears have to be discarded. Previous Karma (actions belonging to previous birth), luck, destiny and fate – such thoughts have to be distanced for a while, the world we live in is the evident destiny, human effort is the duty assigned to us by God, expansion of soul is the supreme victory – such thoughts should come to our remembrance.</p>
		<p>In 4<sup>th</sup> Century BC, when Greek society was indulged in excessive practices of spirit, curse and occult science, Greek philosopher Diogenes erected a scripture at a place visible to entire society which read as follows:</p>
		<p>“Don’t fear God, don’t worry about death; what’s good is easy to get, and what’s terrible is easy to endure”.</p>
		<p>This should serve as medicine to cure different ailments that humans are afflicted with.</p>
		<p>When we talk about heroism and human effort a word of caution needs to be said pressingly. From human effort this world will become a permanent heaven is something not suggested by anyone. There are many things that are improbable to solve through our intellect and science. Lust, anger, jealousy and attachment can be removed from human character is a farfetched thought. When they spring up in our minds, to subdue them in such a fashion that they do not outgrow their limits is possible only through moral science or political system but cannot be completely uprooted from humans. Because in reality the seeds of such thoughts are embedded by nature. In the same manner diseases, old age and death cannot be completely removed through science. All of them have a definite place in the order of creation. In the man’s quest and search of nature, nature constantly conspires for his destruction. The fate of human world is something that cannot be newly written by anyone. On our slate there have been many writings of chalk and coal. Some of them can be removed while some of them continue to stay in a hidden fashion as dents on slate. Our present situation is unlike this but a manifestation of thousands of years of our history. Therefore the changes that we conceive and wish to make to some our old practices is not happening at the rate which we desire. Our vision is progress but that is something that cannot be achieved in hurry. Progress has to be steady and long sustaining one and therefore has to start from educational system and orderly progress to encompass all walks of life. Progress achieved through patience, independent thinking, valuation of pros and cons, humility and appropriate examination will be a successful one.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
