<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-039">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Progress – A Lengthy Act</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">P</span>rogress is not a one day’s act in a lifetime. It should be act of every moment and every day. There is no good thing in our lives which can be achieved in one single day and which can be enjoyed throughout our lives. Hygiene, Health, Wealth, Friendship, love of relatives – for all of them we need to work on a daily basis. After several hours of taking bath we need to cleanse our body again, after few hours of taking food we need to feed ourselves, after certain period of getting salary we need to again attain it and so is progress. If we stop thinking of our progress we decline (Stagnation eventually leads to death) and it is man’s fate. Continuous efforts and refinement of our lives is daily duty.</p>
		<p>A scheme in hands of human being is just like a garland in the hands of monkey, no matter how good a state’s system and financial progress is planned, some feature of human conduct poisons it. As we aim to shoot at fruit hanging from tree it no way guarantees that our throw will strike the fruit and bring it down. With whatever wisdom and caution we try to conduct ourselves in executing our duties there is bound to be some short coming in the end result. This is the principle of progress. Even the best automobile will have its parts worn out as they are continuously used. Space objects like Planets also slow down after sometime due to continuous revolution and rotation due to loss of energy. Likewise, our social system, practice, principles and laws become redundant and outdated after certain time which no one can prevent. Therefore, all of us need to be ever prepared to face and bear challenges to a certain extent. As is our duty to surmount the challenges with enthusiastic effort so is our duty to patiently and bravely endure it. Patience and Human effort are not two different situations but they need to blend into one. Patience does not mean inaction and effort does not mean fight with fit of rage. Patience is to have balanced and calm mind without tumultuous emotions of anger; constantly disallowing the mind to be lethargic and inactive with thoughts of progress and engaging outwardly in rightful action is effort. In this way human effort is a kind of education of soul.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
