<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-040">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Our Life is Peepal Tree</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">O</span>ur ancestors have always compared our life to Peepal tree. Peepal tree lives for a fairly long time. In spite of leaving for hundreds of years it does not appear to be the same today as it was yesterday. A branch which appears fresh and filled with life will appear weak and dry after few weeks. A branch which appears worn and weeding out now is sprouting with new leaves in the very next week. Our human life is also similar with progressive intellect, wisdom, development, enthusiasm on one side and on other side we have wagered mind, effort in vain and complete lack of enthusiasm. There is no space anywhere for complete greed or despair. Rising, falling, rolling, spreading somehow the river of life goes on at all times. Why should we fear and loose heart? For sake of education and enrichment of soul we need to aim and achieve progress. In that we should not have greed, ill temper, and unnecessary excitement for fruits of our efforts and at the same time it is not good to have laziness, lack of human effort. Our activity should continue uninterrupted like act of nature, celestial activities and sprouts of plants.</p>
		<p>If God exists or not is not really relevant. Our life is the primary evidence for us. Our life is remembrance of God. In this way it is appropriate we respect our life as <em>prima facie</em> evidence of God’s activity. Life is gift by God; beautifying Life is our gratitude to God. Life’s progress, refinement and glorification are not only aspiration of people who are indulged in comfort and luxury but also the message of Vedas and Upanishads. Our great sage Vidyaranya who simultaneously overlooked responsibility of being the chief mentor to Vijayanagar Empire and Head pontiff of the prestigious, illustrious Sringeri Shankar Mutt said in Panchadashi <em>“jnAninA charitum shakyam samyak rAjyAdi loukikam”</em> which means it is very well possible for the Jnani (enlightened) to engage in empirical duties such as administering a Kingdom. There is no opposition to worldly activities and Vedic philosophies, practice of Upanishads and Vedas is best employed for selfless service to betterment of society is evident from life of Vidyaranya.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
