<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Faith for Life</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-043">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Appendix</h1>
		<h3>Caution required with respect to Science</strong></h3>
		<p><span class="bigletter">S</span>cience has progressed well and conquered new frontiers unveiling many new secrets of nature but we still have many unanswered questions with reference to life. Human life’s questions are more introspective in nature where as the feats of science are external. We are no way close to use science to answer them.</p>
		<p>Every discipline of science is still incomplete in reaching the complete potential. Physics which is considered as king among all sciences is still exploring the various constituents of atom and its structure. Advancement in life sciences is just breaking grounds and making a paradigm shift. Psychology is yet to establish one strong foundation for answering majority of questions.</p>
		<p>How did life originate from the inanimate substances such as earth, water and air? How did mind originate? These two questions are still answered.</p>
		<p>The reach of these sciences currently is like you have a well which is having water 60 feet deep from surface and rope which is 60 feet in length. Rope can only help you to touch the surface of water but it is not enough to fetch you to water going inside. It is just sufficient to touch exteriors of our life. Power, Telecommunications, Health sciences and Information Technology all have influenced and changed our external lives but not have impacted our internal life.</p>
		<p>The state of science is still half baked, half ripe and many of the principles are there to change and we cannot extrapolate them to every walk of life. There are various principles and customs which have helped to build the social structure of this country. On one hand we have to use science to remove from root some of the social practices which have been evils such as child marriage, female infanticide, blind faith and superstitions but we also have to be extremely cautious not to use them against institutions such as marriage which is a healthier way of social living. Politics on the other hand should not take advantage of these scientific advancements for driving personal agenda and goals. Change is very important for all our lives but change has to be accompanied with proper scientific reasoning.</p>
		<h3>Takeaway Note :</h3>
		<p>It was irrerestible for me to complete my humble attempt of this translation work without this takeaway note which is a brilliant message of Swami Vivekananda, one of the prolific thinker of 20<sup>th</sup> Century which India was blessed with. These words serve as icing on the cake and encapsulates the message of this book:</p>
		<p class="myquote">“The history of the world is the history of a few men who had faith in themselves. That faith calls out the divinity within. You can do anything. You fail only when you do not strive sufficiently to manifest infinite power.</p>
		<p class="myquote">Anything that makes you weak physically, intellectually, and spiritually; reject as poison; there is no life in it, it cannot be true. Truth is strenthening, truth is purity, truth is all-knowledge; truth must be enlightening and must be invigorating.</p>
		<p class="myquote">Let us all work hard, my brethren; this is no time for sleep. On our work depends the coming of the India of the future…”</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
	</section>
</body>
</html>
