<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>Prism Books</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p></p>
<p></p>
<p>samskrti</p>
<h3>(CULTURE)</h3>
<p></p>
<p></p>
<p></p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p></p>
<p></p>
<p></p>
<p>samskrti</p>
<h3>(CULTURE)</h3>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<h3>Dr. D.V. Gundappa</h3>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>Translated into English By</p>
<h4>S. Ramaswamy</h4>
<p>Fellow, Silliman College Yale University, U.S.A.</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>PRISM BOOKS PVT LTD</p>
<p>Bengaluru l Chennai l Hyderabad l Kochi l Kolkata</p>
<p></p>
<p></p>
<p>samskr ti</p>
<p>Dr. D.V. Gundappa</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>(CULTURE)</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>Translation : S. Ramaswamy</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>Published by : Prism Books Pvt. Ltd.</p>
<p># 1865, 32nd Cross, 10th Main, BSK II Stage Bengaluru -560 070. Phone: 080-26714108</p>
<p>
<a>Telefax : 080-26713979, e-mail : </a>
<a>info@prismbooks.com</a>
</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>Also at</p>
<p>Chennai : <a>Tel : 044-24311244, e-mail : </a>prismchennai@prismbooks.com Hyderabad : <a>Tel : 040-23261828, e-mail : </a>prismhyderabad@prismbooks.com Kochi : <a>Tel : 0484-4000945, e-mail : </a>prismkochi@prismbooks.com Kolkata : <a>Tel : 033-24297957, e-mail : </a><a>prismkolkata@prismbooks.com</a></p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>© Prism Books Pvt. Ltd., 2012</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>Pages : 136</p>
<p>Price : R 180/-</p>
<p>Printed on : 70 gsm NS Maplitho DTP : Sree Prints, Bengaluru Cover Design : Prakash S, Bengaluru</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<h2>Introduction</h2>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>DVG&#39;s <b>Samskriti (Culture) </b>is a comprehensive but condensed analysis of the complex concept of culture. It is written in an epigrammatic, Baconian style. He accepts the Arnolosian definition of Culture that it is the sum and substance of the best that has been thought and solid in the world. With his legendary erudition, DVG inxtaposes Western thinkers like Shakespeare, Mathew Arnold, John Henry Cardinal Newman and Emerson with the opinions of Eastern savants like Valmiki, Manu, Bhasa and Bhartrihari and gives examples from characters like Sri Rama, Bharata, Arjuna and Anjaneya to present his concept of culture. At the same time, he defines culture thus– ‘‘If an object in nature is beautified by the discrimination of man, it is culture.’’ He gives several examples. ‘‘The marble is nature. The statue carved out of it by a sculptor is culture.’’ Culture is not confined merely to a pleasing apprearance and beautiful speech. That is external culture. Superior to that is inner, innate culture. Indeed, a study of DVG&#39;s work, CULTURE is itself an act of Culture.</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<h1>DVG</h1>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p></p>
<ol>
<ol>
<li>
<p><b>Gundappa</b>, popularly known as DVG was more a phenomenon than an individual. There is a saying in English – “<i>Some write books on history, but some others create history</i>”. DVG belonged to the latter category. Born in a Tamil family on 17th March, 1887 in a predominantly Telugu region - Mulabagal in Kolar District of Karnataka – he was a very great scholar in Sanskrit and English. There is a saying in Kannada that there is no leaf which the goat does not touch. There is no subject on which DVG has not written. It is said about Oliver Goldsmith that there was nothing he touched which he did not adorn. DVG’s works are innumerable to be even mentioned in a short note like this. However, just a few must be mentioned to understand the stature of this intellectual giant. He has written five biographies, among them two on Vidyaranya (1983), eight Memoirs, among them one on Artists (1970), one on Literature creators (1970), one on the Dewans of Mysore (1971) and one on Vaidic traditionalists (1972), two works on Children’s literature, four works on non-fiction prose among which the present volume – SAMSKRITI is one (1953, 1956, 1969,1987). His interest in Drama and Theatre resulted in the writing seven plays, among them the translation of Shakespeare’s <i>Macbeth </i>(1936, 1974). His works on religion are a special category by themselves – <i>Purusha Sukta </i>(1953, 1971), <i>Isopanishat </i>(1953, 1970) <i>Bhagavadgita Tatparya </i>(1966, 1971), <i>God </i>(1973) and <i>Rita, Satya, Dharma </i>(1975). He has to his credit fifteen collections of poems, among them <i>Nivedana </i>(1924, 1933, 1956), <i>Vidyaranya Stuti </i>(1924)</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p><i>Antahpura Gite </i>(1950, 1953), <i>Valmiki Vyasa Vandanam </i>(1951), <i>Gita Shakuntalam </i>(1960, 1961) etc. However, two of his very special works are <i>Manku Thimmana Kagga & Marula Muniyana Kagga. </i>Many scholars think that his <i>Manku Thimmana Kagga </i>which has seen many editions (1943, 1950, 1958, 1964, 1969, 1987 et al) is his <b>magnum opus. </b>However, it is his most popular work and there are many who can recite it from the beginning to the end as they do the <i>Bhagavadgita</i>. There are as many as twenty scholarly works of comment and criticism on it. The English translations of <i>Mankuthimmana Kagga </i>by Sri. D. Seshagiri Rao and Sri. A. Narasimha Bhat who have also translated DVG’s <i>Marula Muniyana Kagga </i>and the six Audio Cassettes by Swami Brahmananda must be specially mentioned. The best Kannada critics have written books and articles on DVG Among them, Professor L.S. Seshagiri Rao, C.N. Mangala, T.N. Padmanabhan,</p>
<p>G.S. Chakravarthi, P. Balakrishna Rao and G.P. Rajarathnam. A special mention must be made of Shatavadhani Dr. R. Ganesh who is an authority on DVG and he has made a special study of the metrical experiments in DVG’s poetry. It may not out of place to mention here that DVG was quite a “Personality”. A very impressive figure, a wonderful and witty conversationalist, a dominating “presence” in any company, a lover of life with great zest and zeal, he gave assurance of a complete man. The tradition he belonged to – the great scholar Govinda Pai, the translation pioneer B.M. Srikantaiah, the students’ pet T.S. Venkannaiah, A.R. Krishna Sastry of Prabuddha Karnataka, the charismatic orator</p>
<p>C.K. Venkataramaiah and my own teacher, V. Sitaramaiah. It is with utmost humility, that I present my translation of the great DVG’s <b>Samskriti.</b></p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>- <b>S. Ramaswamy</b></p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<h2>Foreword</h2>
<p>(For the Third Edition)</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>Many great souls have encouraged this book. I express my grateful thanks to them.</p>
<p>Even after the copies of the previous edition have been exhausted the demands for this book have been received. After expressing my sorrow for not being able to provide copies, I beg their pardon.</p>
<p>For various reasons the printing work got delayed for this edition.</p>
<p>It has been possible for two new episodes to be added in this edition.</p>
<p>Similarly, the important names of the individuals have been incorporated in the alphabetical order and those of the citations.</p>
<p>Sri C. Krishna and Sri S.R. Ramaswamy have whole-heartedly helped in correcting the proofs.</p>
<p>I have given a lot of trouble to Sri. K. Chidambaram in preparing this book for printing. With his natural friendliness and affection he has borne all difficulties and has helped.</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>Bangalore <b>DVG</b></p>
<p>July 1969</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<h2>Foreword</h2>
<p>(For the Second edition)</p>
<p>This lecture seems to have met with the approval of the general public. The book reviews have also been in accordance. I thank all of them.</p>
<p>The Mysore University has accepted this as a Text Book for the B.A. and B.Sc. classes for the year 1957.</p>
<p>In the opportunity obtained this for re-printing it has been enlarged a little. Since some people suggested that at times the sentences are very cryptic and epigrammatic, in such places one or two words have been added.</p>
<p>A Radio-talk “Samskriti – Prakriti” (Culture and Nature) which is a new chapter here was printed in our prominent newspapers. It has earned me enthusiastic responses from various sources. Again, my thanks.</p>
<p>I believe that in the present expanded version the work will fulfil its objective even better.</p>
<p>Bangalore <b>DVG</b></p>
<p>June 22, 1956.</p>
<h2>Foreword</h2>
<p>(For the First edition)</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>In this lecture some complex issues like Truth, Dharma and Progress have been discussed. Its length has already exceeded the intended limit. Therefore many aspects of those subjects could not be commented on here. There is an intention to write a different lecture on those topics. The explanation of some of the topics dealt with in this lecture are found in the present writer’s books “Rajya Sastra”.</p>
<p>DVG</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<h2>Translator’s note</h2>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>It is comparatively less difficult to translate from one Indian language into another as there is a common cultural core and code. But to translate from an Indian Language into English presents some special difficulties. The very structure of an uninflected language like modern English presents special problems of word-order and length of sentences. When the subject is culture-specific the task is really arduous especially when the text itself is about culture. DVG’s encyclopaedic knowledge and phenomenal erudition do not make things easy. His range of references indicate the scope of this treatise on culture- Amarakosha, Manudharma Sastra, the Upanishads, the Bhagavadgtia, Apastambha Sutra, the Ramayana, the Mahabharata, Bhartihari, Bhavabhuti – to mention just a few sources. It is a task which requires knowledge of Sanskrit on the one hand and more than a nodding acquaintance with Indian metaphysics on the other. I was utterly humbled when Padmasri Dr. Mathur Krishnamurti, Director of Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan asked me to translate DVG’s <b>Samskriti </b>into English. I know I have not been able to vindicate his trust in my ability but I only hope that I have not completely betrayed that trust. I am greatful to my son Dr. S. Ranganath, Director, R.V. Institute of Sanskrit Studies for reading the proof.</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p>S. Ramaswamy</p>
<p>Fellow. Silliman College</p>
<p>Yale University.</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p></p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<h2>About the translator</h2>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<p></p>
<p>S. RAMASWAMY (b. 1932) obtained his</p>
<p>M.A. first class inEnglish Literature and received the Gold Medal from Mysore University in 1954. He obtained his Ph.D. from Bangalore University (1973). He was three times a Fulbrighter, at the University of California, Los Angeles (1964-66), again, a Senior Fulbright Fellow in California (1988) and a third Fulbright at the Universities of Yale and Texas (1991), when he was made a Fellow of Silliman College, Yale University.</p>
<p>He earned his Masters Degree in American Literature from the University of California (1966) and won the prestigeous Phi Beta Kappa InternationalAward in 1965. He was a Shastri Indo-Canadian Scholar at McGill University, Montreal (1989). He was twice a British Council Scholar at Oxford (1983) and London (1989). He has seven books and more than two hundred papers in English to his credit. He has been widely published in the areas of American Literature, Comparative Literature and Indological Studies. He has been published in Jounals like the <i>Indian Journal of English Studies, Indian Journal of American Studies, Indian Journal of Canadian Studies </i>(India) and <i>International Journal of Canadian Studies </i>(Ottawa), <i>Journal of Common wealth Literature </i>(Oxford), and Remarkings. He has studied Sanskrit traditionally, and has researched in Harvard and Heidelberg. He is a Life Member of Indian Association for American Studies, Indian Association for Canadian Studies, Indian Society for Commonwealth Studies and Hon. Member of the Shakespeare Society of Eastern India, Kolkata.</p>
<p>
<br />
</p>
<h2>Contents</h2>
<ul>
<li>
<p>Culture - A preface 1</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Etymology 3</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The Words of Mathew Arnold 9</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The Value System of the Stuff of Life 16</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The Arrangement of the Goal of Life 19</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Hindu Culture 22</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The Finesse in the Depiction of Truth 26</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Truth and Dharma 31</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The Synthesis of Various Virtues 35</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The Sources of Culture 38</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Individual and Society 41</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The General and the Special 44</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Freedom for Culture 51</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The Advantage for Situation 53</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Culture and Government 57</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Questions for Indian Culture 60</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Worldly Progress 65</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Who is a cultured Man? 66</p>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ol>
</ol>
<ul>
<li>
<p>A Man of Taste 86</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Culture not by Books Alone 87</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Prospect 90</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The Words of Emerson 94</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Manu’s Statement 96</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The Ideal Valmiki Upheld 97</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Literature and Culture: Some Examples 99</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Culture and Nature 103</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Culture 113</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The Cosmic Man 120</p>
</li>
</ul>
</body>
</html>
