<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Vasudeva Kriya Yoga</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000d">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Preface</h1>
		<p>Consciousness is the intelligence principle and yoga is a conscious process to accelerate our growth from gross to subtle layers of mind. The goal of yoga is to manifest divinity of consciousness and to unfold the total personality in all of us.</p>
<p>Amidst infinite layers of consciousness, five main layers, Pancha Koshas have been distinctly presented in Taittiriya Upanishads. Pure consciousness is beyond the Pancha Koshas and no words can qualify that ultimate reality. This consciousness-based ontology, the essence of the Vedas and Upanishads, presents the laws of creation-sustenancedestruction triplet with quantitative time dimensions. Among infinite techniques of yoga, four main streams — Jnana, Raja, Bhakti and Karma yoga provide the multidimensional approach.</p>
<p>Judicious application of Yoga brings immense benefits to the individuals and the society. The wisdom of the consciousness-based ontology, describing the structure and laws of Pancha Koshas form the knowledge base for these application of yoga to solve the problems of the modern society.</p>
<p>Four centuries of science have unravelled the secrets of this physical universe. The world is made of energy (E=mc<sup>2</sup>), the laws of Newton (classical mechanics) describes the motion of objects and the quantum mechanics presents the behaviour of fundamental particles at velocities nearing that of light. This knowledge-base coupled with breakthroughs in technology has created a world of unseen comforts and affluence in the developed countries. The hitech era with Information Technology has created a global village.</p>
<p>In the modern age, due to the challenges of stress and its hazards, health and education will open up new dimensions of our knowledge-base. A paradigm shift from matter-based to consciousness-based ontology is bound to get strengthened. The limited understanding of science, that matter (atoms, molecules or energy) is at the base of ‘life’, mind, emotions and consciousness will change to an opposite perspective, that consciousness is primary and intellect, emotions, mind, prana and matter are its offshoots. India for millennia held this perspective and had unravelled the secrets of the various layers of consciousness.</p>
<p>I have known Rajendra Damodara Yenkannamoole for what seems ages now! In all these years, Rajendra has come across as one of the most sincere sadhakas or practitioners of yoga using the path of Raja Yoga or the Patanjala Yoga Sutras. The depth of his practise is easily visible in the way he so easily maintains himself in posture for a long time, with ease and in relaxation. The depth of his practise also reflects in his understanding and the same comes through clearly in his first book Vasudeva Kriya Yoga. Rajendra has systematically demonstrated the eight limbs of Ashtanga Yoga while dwelling on some important aspects of one’s sadhana or practise. I congratulate him on his maiden attempt and am looking forward to many more books from him.</p>
<p><strong>VYASA</strong> has resumed its activities in Australia and we jump-started the same through Rajendra’s efforts. He has also been instrumental in the propagation of yoga in a big way in Australia.</p>
<p class="text-right">Dr. H R Nagendra<br /> Vice Chancellor, S-VYASA <br /> President, VYASA <br /> President, SVYP</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
