<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Vasudeva Kriya Yoga</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000e">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">A Word from the Author</h1>
		<p>Everybody is unique. Discovering our speciality and its full expansion is the aim of yoga. The intention of this book is to bring out the divinity in us through our daily practice of yoga.</p>
		<p>Some people think yoga is a physical exercise <em>(shareera vyayama)</em>. Yet the body, shareera, is bound to fall <em>(Sheeryate iti shareeram)</em> and ‘there is no point in investing on the impermanent. But yoga is not just a physical exercise. Yoga uses the able body to turn its mind towards the imperishable indweller, the Purusha. It is also said, <em>shareeramadyam khalu dharmasadhanam</em> — We need a healthy body to discharge all our dharma, our duties and obligations, in life. Yoga helps us to fulfill our obligations in this life and also in realising the purpose for which we are born.</p>
		<p>By the practise of yoga we improve our physical, mental, social and spiritual health. Yoga not only adds years to our life but also improves the quality of our life.</p>
		<p>Our overall health is vitally important. We have four elements of being — the outer perishable body, and within that, the mind, subtler than the mind is the imperishable <em>jiva</em>, the individual soul, and within that the indweller in everyone: the imperishable God. The untrained mind always goes out towards various objects seeking illusory happiness. But the trained mind sees the limitation in seeking happiness in the outer world and starts looking for happiness by turning its attention inward. Yoga helps in training the perishable body, senses and mind and to use them for our advantage in the pursuit of everlasting happiness.</p>
		<p>The Bhagawat Gita is an authoritative text useful for the seekers of lasting happiness. The Bhagawat Gita is referred to as an <em>Upanishad</em> (cream of knowledge), <em>Brahma vidya</em> (highest knowledge) and <em>Yoga shastra</em> (Yogic text). All seekers of Yoga are indebted to Bhagawat Gita, and we should make an attempt to learn this Yoga shastra.</p>
		<p>This book covers multifold dimensions of yoga, which includes philosophy, yama, niyama, asana, pranayama, mudra, bandha, chakras, pratyahara, yoga nidra, dharana, dhyana, Vasudeva kriya and meditation techniques. This book is prepared with the intention of making this a reference book for all students of yoga. Yoga is divine. Discovering the divinity in yoga and making our life divine is the main purpose of this book.</p>
		<p>This book should not end up on a shelf gathering dust, instead it should be useful for all sincere seekers of yoga. Some of the benefits derived by doing asana and pranayama are listed in this book. The benefits mentioned here are only a few. There are many greater benefits to be discovered and practitioners are urged to experience them first hand.</p>
		<p>This book is called <em>Vasudeva Kriya Yoga</em>. Vasudeva means the indweller in all who illumines everyone’s inner and outer journey. The intention of this book is to bring out the divinity in us and in our daily practise of yoga. This book is also written to document my experience as a Yoga teacher over many years. I have learnt more as a teacher than as a student. I realize the more I study the scriptures, the lesser I know. Knowledge is fathomless and I need the blessings of my acharyas to dive deep into the ocean of scriptures to pick up a few precious pearls.</p>
		<p>I offer my heartfelt gratitude to my countless teachers who inspired me to become what I am now. In the year 1993 Shri Madhava Murthy, a scholar, asked me to write down the Vasudeva mantra everyday, which I have been doing since then. Paramhans Shri Swami Maheshwaranada initiated me into the path of yoga. Shri Swami Ramaswarupanada pushed me into teaching yoga. Vidyavachaspati Shri Dr. Bannanje Govindacharya showed me the way to discover the divinity in yoga. Shri Aralumallige Parthasarathy persuaded me to record my yoga experience and teachings in a book.</p> 
		<p>My special thanks go to Shri Puttige Mutt, Udupi for providing the pictures of Lord Krishna and Hanuman.</p>
		<p>My sincere thanks go to Dr. H R Nagendra Guruji, head of <strong>S-VYASA</strong> Yoga University for publishing this book.</p>
		<p>I am able to write this book because of the blessings of my father Shri Damodara Yenkannamoole who is a great Karma Yogi, and my mother Satyabhama who is an ardent devotee of the Lord. My brother Manmohan, my wife Sumana and my son Amrut are also the inspiration behind this book.</p> 
		<p>I would like to acknowledge the services of my students, Anil Babu and Amrut Rajendra in taking the photographs.</p>
		<p>My salutations, prostrations and obeisance to the Lord who resides in our hearts, to illumine our inner and outer journeys and who gives the fourth state experience of Turiya.</p>
		<p>This book is dedicated to the indweller of all — <strong>Lord Vasudeva.</strong></p>		
		<p class="text-left">14 January 2013<br /> Makara Sankranthi</p>
		<p class="titleauthor">Rajendra Damodara Yenkannamoole</p>
<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
	</section>
</body>
</html>
