<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Vasudeva Kriya Yoga</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000f">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">About the Second Edition</h1>
		<p>Knowledge is fathomless. Every yoga class is a new learning for me. All the students are my teachers and their sincerity and commitment takes me deeper into yoga. This will be a ready reference book for all sincere seekers of yoga.</p>
<p>More kriyas, asanas and mudras have been added in this edition. The newly added section on puja mudra will be beneficial during the practitioner’s daily ritualistic worship.</p>
<p>As an easy reference for the users of this book (including practitioners and teachers), all the asanas, kriyas, mudras, pranayamas and meditation techniques have been categorized into five levels and provided in a pictorial form in Appendix A. Some YouTube references are given in Appendix B. Yoga class prayers are given in Appendix C.</p>
<p>I would like to thank Edelweiss Symons, Anila Kennedy, Diptiman Yadav and Sumana Rajendra for editing this book, Amrut Rajendra for taking photos and videos; and acknowledge S-VYASA’s Bharatheesha P for the design and layout.</p>
<p>This book is dedicated to the indweller of all — <strong>Lord Vasudeva</strong>. May He illumine our paths.</p>
<p class="text-left">14 January 2015<br /> Makara Sankranthi</p>
		<p class="text-right">Rajendra Damodara Yenkannamoole</p>
		</section>
</body>
</html>
