<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Vasudeva Kriya Yoga</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-001">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Introduction</h1>
		<p class="myquote">Yoga is magic. Yoga is music. Yoga is mystical. Yoga is divine. Yoga is <em>sadhana</em> (practice). Yoga is the secret path towards success. Yoga is the means to achieve supreme realization. Yoga is spirituality. Yoga is the enhancement of the individual life span. Yoga is the enhancement of <em>prana shakti</em> (life force). Yoga makes the mind calm, cool, clean and clear. Yoga is the happy blending of physical strength, mental energy and spiritual energy.</p> 
		<p>Beyond the physical body 3(annamaya kosha), there is what is called the pranic body 3(pranamaya kosha). Beyond the pranic body is the mind body 3(manomaya kosha). Beyond the mind body there is the intellectual body 3(vijnanamaya kosha). Beyond the intellectual body is the bliss body 3(anandamaya kosha). Beyond this is super consciousness (the Supreme indweller, the inner essence of all).</p> 
<p>There are many meanings for the word Vasudeva. 3Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam means the whole world is one family.</p> 
<p>According to Indian Philosophy Lord Shri Krishna is also called as Vasudeva. <em>Vasu</em> means <em>Vasanthi Asmin Sarvani Bhutani ithi</em> i.e. in whom all beings reside and He who resides in all beings. <em>Deva</em> means <em>Divu kreda ithi</em> i.e. for whom the acts of creation, sustenance, and destruction are mere play. Vasudeva also means one who resides in all beings as a Supreme being.</p> 
<p>Vasudeva Kriya Yoga is a science which helps a person to realize this Supreme consciousness. <em>Vasudeva Kriya Yoga</em> is a kriya, pranayama and mantra combined into a single formula. <em>Vasudeva Kriya Yoga</em> focuses on exhalation or <em>baahya vritti pranayama</em>. This reduces the breathing rate. When the breathing rate decreases, our life span increases. <em>Vasudeva Kriya Yoga</em> strengthens the heart muscles, removes blockages and destresses the mind. A destressed mind is relaxed. A relaxed mind expands. In the expanded state of mind, intuition dawns. When the mind is calm and serene, one is able to hear his or her <em>anahata</em> sound (inner sound). When the mind is calm and serene one radiates peace. Above all, every breath is synchronized with the divine name and no breath is wasted without the divine name.</p> 
<p>Vasudeva Kriya Yoga encourages us to think good and think divine. It makes a person effective, efficient, dynamic, dashing, daring and much more than that, divine.</p> 
<p>Yoga is potentially divine. Yoga is the means through which one can become a Yogi. A Yogi is one who can become a <em>Tapasvi</em> (one who can do <em>Tapas</em> — austerity). Yoga leads to meditation. Meditation leads to intuition and insight. The whole process is a divine experience. Yoga instills confidence. It removes impurities. It makes the body stronger, the mind sharper, increases intelligence and creates a sacred personality.</p> 
<p>Vasudeva Kriya Yoga is the science of Swara Yoga. It is the enhancement of <em>prana shakti</em> by effectively slowing down breathing. <em>It</em> is the science which teaches the art of reducing the breathing rate, feeling the divine experience and reaching the celestial heights of extraordinary insight and intuition.</p> 
<p>Vasudeva Kriya Yoga is not a new discovery. It was mentioned in <em>Atharva Veda</em>, and was hidden. Now it is uncovered and this most effective science of Vasudeva Kriya Yoga has been rediscovered. The <em>Atharva Veda</em> has twelve <em>shakhas</em> (branches) and they are represented through a twelve lettered mantra which is popularly known as the <em>dwadasha akshara</em> mantra.</p> 
<p>When Narada Maharshi gave <em>mantropadesha</em> (initiated a mantra) to Dhruva, it was with the <em>dwadasha akshara</em> mantra. One Vasudeva mantra made a five year old boy Dhruva, rule the whole world and also provided the rulership of the cosmic world. Today, in this age once again, it is the <em>mantropadesha</em> of the same Narada Marharshi that has created a whole new world of Vasudeva Kriya Yoga.</p> 
<p><em>Om Namo Bhagawate Vasudevaya</em> is that dwadasha <em>akshara mantra</em>. This mantra directs the mind towards God and simultaneously slows down the breathing rate resulting in enhancement of the <em>prana shakti</em> in the body. A happy and harmonious blending of both of the above is the core principle of Vasudeva Kriya Yoga.</p> 
<p>Vasudeva Kriya Yoga not only adds years to our life but also improves the quality of our life. It takes a person to deeper meditational levels of worship of the divine. <em>Vasudeva</em> means the indweller of all, who is perfect in every way, and is <em>Jnananda swarupa</em> (knowledge and bliss personified). Whatever we think of and contemplate, we attain that. Thinking of the perfect indweller, we also attain those perfect qualities according to our capacity.</p> 
<p>Vasudeva Kriya Yoga is beyond any religion, dogma or doctrine or school of thought. It can be very beneficial and applicable for all humanity. Vasudeva mantra japa and yoga practised together creates a conjunction of success and happiness.</p> 
<p>At the base level, Vasudeva Kriya Yoga enables the practitioner to be flexible in asana or physical postures. Simultaneously the philosophical, spiritual and devotional foundation is also strengthened gradually. Yoga is a Vedic concept. The entire Vedic system comes from the <em>rishi parampara</em> (sage tradition) of India. Patanjali’s <em>Yoga Sutras, Hata Yoga Pradipika or Gherenda Samhita</em> are the results of great <em>tapasya</em> (austerity) by the ancient maharishis of India. They have offered these treasures freely to humanity as a means of attaining divinity and realization of the Supreme God. This great yoga which emerged from the <em>rishi</em> heritage of Vedic India is a great gift to humanity.</p> 
<p>Vasudeva Kriya Yoga, along with asana, trains a person in yama, niyama, pranayama, dharana, dhyana and then towards the most beneficial mantra japa synchronized with the breath. Mantra japa makes the <em>sadhak</em> (practitioner) experience pure devotion and love directed towards God.</p> 
<p>Vasudeva Kriya Yoga makes a person purer, sacred, active, dynamic and successful. It puts the <em>sadhak</em> (practitioner) in the path of divine realization. Continuous thinking of the Lord with synchronized breathing enhances the energy power, the vital forces or <em>prana shakti</em>. Scattered mental rays are cohesively unified, thought currents become sharp and work is done with focus and vision.</p> 
<p>Vasudeva Kriya Yoga makes a person realize that God is the ultimate controlling source and strength of the entire universe. From day one, it directs us towards the enhancement of <em>prana shakti</em>, gives control over physical postures and aids in experiencing divinity. It helps in awakening our higher human potential.</p> 
<p>There is no time and place restriction to do this kriya. It can be done in the workplace, in public transport, while travelling, held up in traffic or during any activity. Practising Vasudeva Kriya initially in the form of <em>japa</em> over months and years eventually becomes <em>ajapa japa</em> (a spontaneous japa) and becomes our life long companion. When we practise this, we radiate peace and this will have a calming effect on the world. When we practise Vasudeva Kriya we experience peace and serenity. Our mere experience contributes to world peace. When we are at peace, our family is at peace. When our family is at peace, our neighbourhood is at peace. When the neighbourhood is at peace, our state is at peace. When the state is at peace, the country is at peace. When countries are at peace, the world is at peace. This world peace must dawn through us and begin within us. Vasudeva Kriya Yoga provides a vehicle through which a spiritual aspirant can reach the supreme goal of God realisation.</p> 
<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
	</section>
</body>
</html>
