<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Vasudeva Kriya Yoga</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-012">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Mudras and Bandha</h1>
		<p>Mudra means symbol. Mudra means insignia. Mudra means commitment. Samudra means full commitment. That is why God is called as Samudra, as He has full commitment in everything and never does anything half-heartedly.</p>
<p>According to Gheranda Samhita, Mudras and Bandhas are done to steady the body. Mudras and Bandhas help in preventing the dissipation of energy, and help in redirecting the energy. Bandhas are the lock and mudras are the lock over a lock. </p>
<p><i>Ha  </i>means Sun, <i>Ta  </i>means Moon. The  seat of moon centre is the <i>Sahasrara </i> <i>chakra,  </i>and the seat of Sun system is the  <i>manipura chakra </i>at the navel. Our active  life continues as long as the nectar remains  in the <i>sahasrara chakra </i>at the crown.  Just like pressing the accelerator in the  car draws more fuel, when we breathe  rapidly, we draw more nectar from the  <i>sahasrara chakra </i>which flows into the  <i>manipura chakra </i>where it gets consumed.  Bandhas like Jalandhara bandha, Kriyas  like Vasudeva Kriya, Viparita Karani,  Asanas such as Shirasasana, Sarvangasana,  Vrischikasana etc. reduce the consumption  of the nectar (<i>amruta</i>) at <i>manipura chakra </i> and preserve the body’s vitality. </p>
<p>Through manipulating our <i>Prana</i> or  vital energy, we can direct it towards  better health, well being and personal  transformation. </p>
<p>Mudra is defined as <i>Mudham Dadaati </i> <i>Devaanam Dravayasya Asuraarapi </i>– ‘That  by which the divine beings get happiness and  the negative forces and diseases are driven  away’.’ Mudras are used in <i>Tantra puja</i>. </p>
<p>Mudras are classified into: </p>
<ul>
<li>Kaya Mudra (mudra through body —<i>Viparitakarani, Yoga mudra, Manduki </i><i>Mudra </i>etc) </p>
<li>Mana Mudra (mudra through the senses on the face, that is using lips, eyes, nose, ear, tongue – <i>Shambhavi, Kaki, Akashi, </i><i>Nasika Dristi, Shanmukhi, Khechari) </i></p>
<li>Bandha <i>(Jaalandhar, Uddiyan, Moola </i><i>and Maha) </i></p>
<li>Adhara Mudra (supporting mudras-<i>Aswini, Vrajoli </i>etc)</p>
<li>Hasta Mudra (mudras through hands- balance the </p>
<ul></ul>
 <li><i>Mahabhootas  </i>like fire, water, air, earth and ether elements and </p>
<li><i>Tanmaatras </i>like taste, touch, smell and sound in the body and </p>
 <li><i>Doshas</i> in the body like <i>kapha </i>(phlegm),<i> pitta </i>(fire) and <i>vata </i>(air). </p>
 </ul>
 </ul>
 <section class="level2 numbered" id="id-012.01">
<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Hasta Mudra (Hand mudra)</h2>


	</section>
	</section>
</body>
</html>

