<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>Vasudeva Kriya Yoga</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-014">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhyana and Samadhi</h1>
		<p>Meditation means <i>manana, dhyana</i>.  <i>Dhyana</i> means single pointed attention.  Meditation confirms what the mind thinks.  If  I  think  negative  and  meditate  upon  it,  it  confirms  and  validates  my  negative  thinking. If I think positive, it confirms and  validates  my  positive  thinking.  By  single  pointed  meditation,  one’s  energy  builds  and <i>siddhi </i>or perfection is obtained. <i>Siddhi </i> does  not  mean  that  the  person  knows  Truth. The scriptures say that before we do  any meditation, we need to be clear about  the  goal.  We  need  to  continuously  read  or  hear  about  noble  ideals,  goals,  think  about them and then meditate upon them.  The  scriptures  call  this  process  <i>sravana </i> (hearing),  <i>manana  </i>(contemplating)  and  <i>nidhidyasana  </i>(experiencing).  In  deeper  meditation,  even  the  mind  stops  and  only  the self operates. This is known as <i>unmani </i> <i>bhava </i>or <i>samadhi</i>. </p>
<p><i>Agni Purana </i>says that there is no purifier  like <i>dhyana, </i>which purifies all our negative  karmas. Meditation happens in two phases  —the mental and beyond the mental level.  <i>Dhyana</i> means single pointed thinking on  our  object  of  contemplation.  Whenever  our  mind  wanders  away  from  our  object  of  contemplation,  bringing  it  back  is  called <i>dhyana</i>. This is at the mental level.  <i>Agni Purana </i>says  ‘at  the  mental  level  of  dhyana,  one  should  think  of  Omnipotent,  Omniscient, Omnipresent Vishnu’. </p>
<p>In  the  next  stage  of  meditation  the  mind  stops, and in Yoga it is called as <i>unmani </i> <i>bhava  </i>or  <i>samadhi</i>.  In  deep  sleep  our  mind  also  stops  functioning.  Stopping  the  mind  when  we  are  awake  and  aware  is  meditation. When we say ’I am meditating  on God during </p>
<p>meditation, we need to try to find out who  this  ’I‘  is.  When  we  know  ‘who  I  am’,  this  is  self  realization,  which  is  the  first  step  towards  God  realization.  When  we  realize  this,  then  Self  starts  functioning  and  it  experiences nothing but our true nature —  ‘bliss’. </p>
<p>When  the  self-realized  person  realizes  that  the  same  Self  pervades  everywhere,  it  is  called  God  realization.  The  self- realized  person  knows  that  he  or  she  did  not  create  the  mind  or  body.  When  the  self  realized  person  realizes  that  there  is  something  beyond,  which  is  <i>Deshataha </i> <i>ananta  </i>(existing  in  all  places),  <i>Kalataha </i> <i>ananta  </i>(existing  in  all  times),  <i>Gunataha </i> <i>ananta </i>(existing with all noble attributes),  <i>Shaktitaha ananta </i>(Omni  potent),  this  is  called  ’God  realization’.  This  leads  to  the  inner <i>dharshan </i>(vision) of the God, or God  realization. The <i>Agni Purana </i>says that when  we have the <i>dharshan </i>of <i>Hari</i>remover of all  our  negativitiesall  our  <i>paapasam harati </i> —‘all our karmas get burnt up.’ </p>
<p>The  scriptures  say  that  the  bliss  one  experiences in self realization is immense,  but  in  God  realization  it  is  infinite.  The  process  of  increasing  our  bliss  is  in  the  inward  journey  and  not  in  the  outward  journey. </p>
<p>The process of deep sleep and meditation is  similar. In deep sleep, there is an awareness  of  self,  an  awareness  of  bliss  and  an  awareness of our inner clock. When we get  up from deep sleep we say ’I‘ slept blissfully  from  last  night  to  this  morning  but  we  realize this bliss only when we get up from  sleep, not while we are in deep sleep. Every  one of us wants to experience this bliss, that  is the main reason we go to sleep. But, we  go  to  sleep  ignorant  and  get  up  ignorant  without any inner awakening. </p>
<p>Like  in  deep  sleep,  in  meditation  also,  there is an awareness of Self, an awareness  of  bliss  and  an  awareness  of  our  inner  clock, but we experience this in the seat of  meditation.  We  always  come  out  enriched  from  meditation,  unlike  sleep.  Awareness  of our sleeping process in the wakeful state  is  meditation.  In  meditation,  the  pineal  gland get activated and our intuition ability  increases, our creativity increases. We grow  wiser after each meditation. </p>
<p>The process of the inward journey comes in  four  stages:  Pratyahara,  Dharana,  Dhyana  and Samadhi. </p>
<section class="level2 numbered" id="id-014.01">
<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Pratyahara</h2>
<p><i>Pratyahara  </i>means  ‘withdrawal’.  This  is not  a  forceful  withdrawal.  As  we  practise asanas,  pranayama,  kriyas  and  yoga  nidra while  observing  <i>yama  </i>and  <i>niyama</i>, the mind  naturally  becomes  introverted  and elevated.  The  mind  no  longer  seeks  outer objects of happiness because it starts seeing higher happiness within. </p>
</section>
<section class="level2 numbered" id="id-014.02">
<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Yoga Nidra</h2>
<p><i>Yoga Nidra</i>  is  one  of  the  processes  of  pratyahara.  <i>Yoga Nidra</i>  is  a  Tantric  technique  we  use  to  calm  the  body,  emotions  and  mind.  Even  when  we  sleep,  our mind is active and sometimes we get up  very  tired.  Tiredness  cannot  be  overcome  by  sleep  alone.  Sometimes  we  sleep  for  a  whole day and still feel tired. Generally we  go  to  sleep  without  resolving  our  tensions  and stresses, and these in turn go into our  psyche  and  often  come  back  to  haunt  us  with  a  psychic  or  mental  condition.  <i>Yoga </i> <i>Nidra</i> is dynamic sleep – <i>satwic  </i>(pure)  sleep.  Whereas  normal  sleep  is  <i>tamasic </i> (dull, <i>Yoga Nidra</i> is a psychic sleep wherein  we  consciously  resolve  the  tension  held  in  each  part  of  the  body.  History  says  that  Napoleon  in  the  middle  of  the  battlefield  used to withdraw and go into 20 minutes of  <i>Yyoga Nidra</i>, then return to the battle field  fully charged. </p>
<p><i>Yoga Nidra</i> is the key to success for many  great  people.  Though  they  are  extremely  busy,  they  accomplish  many  tasks  in  a  single lifespan, which is unthinkable to an  ordinary person. </p>
<ul>
<li>While  we  are  awake  —brain  waves  oscillate at Beta frequency (13—20 cps). </p>
<li>In  <i>Yoga Nidra</i>,  the  super  conscious  mind  (the  fourth  stage  –  <i>turiya</i>, and  borderline  state  between  wakefulness  and deep sleep) , brain waves decrease  to Alpha level (8—12 cps). </p>
<li>In the dream state (subconscious level)  ,the  brain  waves  lower  to  Theta  level  (4—7 cps). </p>
<li>In deep sleep (unconscious level) ,brain  activity drops to Delta level (0—4 cps). </p>
<li><i>Benefits:  </i>In  normal  sleep  only  the  <i>annamaya kosha </i>(physical  sheath)  becomes rejuvenated, whereas in <i>Yoga </i> <i>Nidra</i>  all  5  layers  of  our  personality,  starting  from  the  <i>annamaya kosha </i> (physical  sheath),  <i>pranamaya kosha </i> (breath  sheath),  <i>manomaya kosha </i> (intellectual  sheath),  <i>vijnanamaya </i> <i>kosha </i> (intuitional  sheath)  to  <i>ananadamaya kosha </i>(bliss sheath) get  rejuvenated.  Twenty  minutes  of  <i>Yoga </i> <i>Nidra</i> is like 2 hours of deep sleep and  this rejuvenates the body and mind. </p>
<li><i>Process:  </i>Lie  down  on  your  back  with  the  feet  and  hands  spread  apart  and  palms facing upwards. </p>
<li>If  you  are  feeling  cold  pull  a  blanket  over you. </p>
<li>Be aware of your breathing. </p>
<li>With inhalation feel the abdomen going  up and chest expanding. </p>
<li>With  exhalation  feel  the  chest  contracting followed by the stomach. </p>
<li>Try not to go to sleep. </p>
<li>In <i>Yoga Nidra</i> you are mentally awake  and physically asleep. </p>
<li>In <i>Yoga Nidra</i> you will go through over  100  parts  of  your  body  and  mentally  touch these parts. </p>
<li>Mentally  pass  your  energy  on  to  these  parts. </p>
<li>Slowly move your attention to right leg  parts,  left  leg  parts,  right  hand  parts,  left  hand  parts,  torso,  spinal  column  parts, face, and internal organ parts in  sequence as given in the Table below. </p>
<li>Gently be aware of your breathing. </p>
<li>Wriggle your fingers and toes. </p>
<li>Rub  your  palms  together  and  warm  your face muscles with the palms.</p>
<li>Gently open your eyes. </p>
<li>Roll to your right and gently sit up.</p>
</ul>
<!--
<table>
	<tr>
<th colspan="2">Legs</th>
<th colspan="2">Hands</th>
<th>Torso</th>
<th>Spinal column/Chakras</th>
<th>Face</th>
<th>Internal Organ</th>
</tr>
<tr>
table balance ???????
</tr>
</table>
-->
</section>
<section class="level2 numbered" id="id-014.03">
<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Dharana</h2>
<p><i>Dharana  </i>means ‘holding the mind’s attention  within  the  awareness’.  In  the initial  stages  of  <i>sadhana</i>  the  mind  seeks happiness outside even when it experiences the higher happiness within. By continued <i>sadhana</i>, the mind stops seeking happiness outside and can be turned inwards, to enjoy the bliss within for a long period of time. </p>
</section>
<section class="level2 numbered" id="id-014.04">
<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Dhyana</h2>
<p>Continuous  flow  of  thoughts  to  the  Lord within  the  heart  is  <i>dhyana</i>.  In  Shrimad Bhagawat  Gita,  Shri  Krishna  explains  the process of <i>dhyana</i> as: </p>
<p class="verse"><i>Samam kaya shirogrivam<br /> dharayan achalam stiraha<br />Samprekya Nasikagram swam<br />dhishachana avalokayan BG 6.13 </i></p>
<p class="verse"><i>Prashanta atma vigatabhi<br /> brahmachari vrate stitaha<br /> Mana samyamya macchitto<br /> yukta aaseeta matparaha BG 6.14 </i></p>
<p>‘Keeping  the  body,  neck  and  head  in  one  line sit without movement. Gaze at the tip  of your nose and without looking anywhere.  With a pleasant mind without fear, steadfast  in <i>brahmachari vrata</i>, subduing the mind,  think of the Lord alone as the highest goal.’ </p>
<p>In <i>dhyana </i>(meditation) the mind carves a  picture  we  would  like  to  see  within.  What  we  see  in  <i>dhyana  </i>(meditation)  need  not  be  the  Truth  because  it  may  be  a  creation  of our mind. Mind just confirms our belief.  The  purpose  of  <i>dhyana  </i>is  to  go  beyond  the realm of the mind and allow <i>swarupa </i> (our own true nature) to function. <i>Dhyana </i> helps  us  to  tap  into  our  own  true  nature,  <i>jnana anada swarupa</i>—our true nature — knowledge and bliss. </p>
</section>
<section class="level2 numbered" id="id-014.05">
<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Samadhi</h2>
<p>The processes of sleep and meditation are the  same.  In  both  cases,  our  soul  makes contact  with  ’Self  of  all‘  –  the  Lord.  The only  difference  is  that  in  sleep  we  are  not aware that we are in contact with the Lord, while  in  meditation  we  are  aware  that we  are  in  contact  with  the  Lord.  Our  soul gets  nourishment  from  the  Supreme.  In deep sleep our soul embraces the Supreme and  gets  nourishment.  That  is  why  sleep deprivation  weakens  a  person  and  makes him or her vulnerable and weak. </p>
<p>In  normal  life  we  experience  only  three  <i>avastas</i>—<i>jagrat </i>(wakeful)<i>, swapna </i>(dream)<i>, </i> <i>sushupti  </i>(deep  sleep),  and  this  is  common  to  all  animals.  In  <i>chaturmurthi upasana </i> (the  four  stage  sadhana),  the  Lord  in  the  form  of  <i>Anirudda  </i>illumines  our  wakeful  state  from  <i>ajna chakra</i>.  Lord  in  the  form  of <i>Pradyumna</i> takes us to dream state and  operates from <i>vishudda chakra. </i>Lord in the  form of <i>Sankarashana </i>takes us to deep sleep  stage  and  operates  from  <i>anahata chakra</i>.  We go to sleep ignorant and get up ignorant. </p>
<p>There is a fourth state and the <i>rishis </i>(sages)  have called this <i>turiya </i>(the fourth one)<i> </i>or  <i>unmani bhava</i>. The sages say that <i>turiya </i> is  the  true  wakeful  state  to  the  reality  and  that  the  other  three  states  <i>of jagrat, </i> <i>swapna </i>and <i>supti </i>are all sleep phases. To  get to this <i>turiya  </i>stage sadhana (intense  practise) is required. Like a normal person  longs  for  and  enjoys  sleep,  a  person  who  has tasted the <i>turiya  </i>state  longs  for  more  of this experience. The indweller of all Lord  Vasudeva  —  a  giver  of  liberation  takes  us  to the <i>turiya  </i>state  in  the  heart  centre  — <i>anahata chakra. </i>When this happens an  immense  joy  dawns  and  it  is  reflected  as  <i>ojas  </i>(radiance)  in  the  face  of  the  <i>sadhak. </i> In this state we see a flash or form of our  chosen ideal. <i>Shrimad Bhagawatam </i>says  that  this  flash  does  not  last  long  but  only  for a quarter of a <i>matra </i>time (<i>matra </i>is the  time  required  to  say  a  syllable).  Reaching  the  fourth  stage  <i>turiya or unmani bhava </i> (beyond the horizon of mind) is the ultimate  aim  of  Yoga.  The  person  who  reaches  this  state  is  always  in  happiness,  joy  and  bliss  for  no  reason  and  irrespective  of  outer  circumstances. </p>
</section>
<section class="level2 numbered" id="id-014.06">
<h2 class="level2-title" epub:type="title">Vasudeva Kriya</h2>
<p>There is an ancient science of pranic body  rhythms which explains how the movement  of <i>Prana </i>can be controlled by manipulation  of the breath. This Science is called <i>Swara </i> <i>Yoga</i>. More information on this is available  in <i>Tantric </i>texts which are a part of <i>Atharva </i> <i>veda. Atharva veda </i>has  twelve  <i>shakhas</i>  (branches)  and  these  twelve  <i>shakhas  </i>are  represented  through  12  lettered  Mantra  (<i>dwadasha akshara mantra</i>)  Om  Namo  Bhagawate Vasudevaya. </p>
<p>Patanjali  says  <i>tapas, swadyaya </i>and  <i>ishwara pranidaana </i>together is <i>kriya yoga</i>.  Vasudeva Kriya is a mantra, pranayama and  dhyana combined in one. Vasudeva Kriya is  with  <i>bhahya vritti pranayama </i>(focus  on  the exhale). This type of breathing activates  the  parasympathetic  nervous  system.  This  type  of  pranayama  strengthens  the  heart  muscles,  slows  down  the  breathing  rate,  increases  the  lifespan,  relaxes  the  mind,  makes  the  mind  creative,  enables  one  to  develop  intuition,  insights,  and  above  all,  every  breath  is  synchronized  with  the  twelve  syllable  divine  maha  mantra  Om  Namo Bhagawate Vasudevaya. In Vasudeva  Kriya  you  are  inhaling  with  three  syllable  Om  —A,  U,  and  M  and  exhaling  through  twelve  syllable  Om  Namo  Bhagawate  Vasudevaya. This way you are activating the  parasympathetic nervous system. </p>
<p>Vasudeva  Kriya  Yoga,  however,  should  not  be  confused  with  pranayama,  which  involves  a  different  aspect  of  breath.  Although both deal with <i>Pprana</i>, Vasudeva  Kriya emphasizes the analysis of breath and  the significance of different <i>pranic </i>rhythms.  Whereas,  pranayama  involves  techniques  to  redirect,  store  and  control  <i>Pprana</i>.  Vasudeva  Kriya  Yoga  not  only  involves  all  practises  of  pranayama,  but  it  is  a  much  more intensive and precise technique. </p>
<p>Breathing  goes  deeper  than  the  lungs.  Breathing not only helps in maintaining the  physical body, but also helps in the evolution  of consciousness. Beyond the physical body  the  energy  body  exits.  Beyond  the  energy  body  the  mind  exists,  beyond  the  mind  the  intellect  exists,  beyond  the  intellect  consciousness  exists  and  beyond  this  is  super  consciousness. This is mentioned  in  Bhagawat Gita as: </p>
<p><i>Indriyani Paranyahu</i> <i>Indriyebhyaha Param Manaha </i> <i>Manatastu Para Buddhir-</i> <i>yo Buddhehe Paratastu Saha </i> <i>B.G. 3.42 </i></p>
<p>When we breath, a flow of energy is created  in  the  body.  This  flow  is  called  <i>nadi  </i>in  yoga.  In  the  nostrils  three  different  flows  of  energy  are  created  —<i>ida</i>,  <i>pingala  </i>and  <i>sushumna</i>. The left nostril is connected to  <i>ida</i>, the right nostril to <i>pingala </i>and when  both  nostril  function  together,  the  central  <i>nadi</i> <i>sushumna</i> is stimulated. </p>
<p>When  the  breath  goes  through  the  left  nostril  <i>(ida),  </i>the mind <i>(chitta)  </i>get’s  activated<i>. </i>The c<i>hitta </i>controls <i>jnanendriyas </i> (the  organs  of  knowledge)—eyes,  ears,  nose,  tongue  and  skin.  When  the  breath  flows  through  the  right  nostril  <i>(pingala), </i> the  body  get’s  activated.  This  intern  activates <i>karmendriyas- </i>hand, legs, speech,  reproductive  and  excretory  organs.  When  both  nostrils  (chitta  and  body)  operates  together, the spiritual energy is activated. </p>
<p>To put it in another way, while meditating  if  the  right  nostril  <i>(pingala)  </i>is  active,  the  body  become’s  restless  on  the  other  hand  while  meditating  if  the  left  nostril  <i>(ida) </i> is  active,  the  mind  become’s  restless.  However,  when  both  <i>ida  </i>and  <i>pingala  </i>are  active,  the  s<i>ushumna nadi </i>become  active  and  the  mind  becomes  one  pointed.  Thus  Vasudeva Kriya aims at harmonizing body  and mind by adjusting the breath to achieve  one-pointedness in the mind. </p>
<p><i>Sushumna nadi </i>is  the  cause  of  spiritual  experience and the purpose of every <i>satwic</i>  sadhana  is  to  activate  it.  The  <i>sushumna</i>  runs  straight  up  the  centre  of  the  spine  and  merges  with  <i>ida  </i>and  <i>pingala  </i>at the  <i>Sahasrara chakra</i>.  It  is  through  this  <i>Sushumna nadi </i>that  <i>kundalini shakti </i>has  to  be  channelized.  When  the  <i>sushumna </i> flows,  the  mental  and  physical  energy  becomes  even  and  rhythmic  (one  hears  inner  sound—<i>nada  </i>or  <i>swara</i>),  thoughts  are stilled and the mind becomes calm. For  a yogi this <i>nada </i>or <i>swara </i>helps in <i>dhyana </i> or  meditation.  The  aim  of  Vasudeva  Kriya  Yoga  is  to  develop  this  type  of  breathing  by reducing the activities of the alternating  nostrils. </p>
<p>This  Vasudeva  Kriya  makes  the  breathing  slow  and  steady.  Vasudeva  Kriya  infuses  the <i>Prana shakti </i>(energy level) in the body.  In  Vasudeva  Kriya  no  breath  is  wasted  without  a  divine  name.  By  practising  this,  mind automatically goes into <i>ajapa japa </i> (spontaneous  repetition  of  the  Lord’s  name).  This  is  the  very  purpose  of  all  spiritual  sadhana,    of  irrespective  of  the  path we take. In the 8th chapter of Bhagawat </p>
<p>Gita Shri Krishna says, </p>
<p><i>Antakale cha mameva</i> <i>smaran muktva kalevaram</i> <i>yaha prayati sa madbhavam</i> <i>yaati nastyatra samshayaha </i> <i>B.G. 8.5 </i></p>
<p><i>Yam yam vaapi smaran bhavam</i> <i>tyajatyante kalevaram</i> <i>tam tamevaiti kauteya</i> <i>sadaa tadbhava bhavitaha </i> <i>B.G. 8.6 </i></p>
<p><i>Tasmat sarveshu kaaleshu</i> <i>mamanusmara yudyacha</i> <i>mayyarpita manobuddhi</i> <i>mamaivaishya asamshayam </i> <i>B.G. 8.7 </i></p>
<p>‘He who departs from the body thinking of  Me alone even at the time of death, attains my  state’; there is no doubt about it. Kaunteya,  whatever you think of at the last minute of  your life and leave the body that alone you  attain, being ever absorbed in that thought.  Therefore all the time think of me and fight  the battle of life. With mind and reason thus  set on Me, you will doubtlessly come to Me. </p>
<p>The Supreme indweller of all is not limited  to  only  one  name  and  only  one  form.  The  Supreme indweller, Light of all Lights, has  all the names and all the forms. Whatever  form and name we worship Him, it reaches  Him alone. This is like rain water ultimately  reaching  the  ocean,  all  our  prayers  ultimately reaches the Supreme Lord. </p>
<p><i>Vasa </i>means resides in heart. <i>Deva </i>means  Supreme being. Vasudeva means, the Lord  resides  in  everyone’s  heart  as  a  Supreme  being to illumine our path. </p>
<p><i>Vasu  </i>means  pure  mind.  <i>Deva  </i>means  illumine.  Vasudeva  means,  He  reveals  Himself to those who have a pure mind. </p>
<p><i>Va  </i>means  highest  of  the  knowledge.  <i>Asa  </i>means  existing  in  everyone’s  heart.  Vasudeva  means,  the  highest  knowledge  can be discovered only in one’s heart. This  can  be  attained  only  through  turning  our  attention inward. </p>
<p>Everyone  goes  through  three  <i>avastas </i> (states)  —  <i>jagrat  </i>(wakeful)<i>, swapna </i> (dream) <i>and supti </i>(deep sleep). No training  is needed to go through these three <i>avastas </i> (states). But the fourth state called <i>Turiya </i> can  be  attained  only  through  <i>sadhana </i> (intense practise). The <i>Om </i>represents these  three  <i>avastas—</i>-(states).  Everyone  goes  through these three <i>avastas. </i>But with effort  alone we can attain the fourth state called  <i>Turiya.  </i>The  <i>jnanis  </i>(knowers)  experience  this <i>Turiya avasta </i>(the fourth state) which  leads to <i>moksha  </i>(liberation)  by  the  Grace  of the indweller of all, the Lord in the form  of  Vasudeva.  In  Vasudeva  Kriya  you  are  inhaling with three syllable Om —A, U, and  M and exhaling through twelve syllable Om  Namo Bhagawate Vasudevaya. </p>
<p>Om  Namo  Bhagavate  Vasudevaya  means  my  salutations,  prostrations,  obeisance  to  the  Lord  who  resides  in  our  hearts  to  illumine both our inner and outer journey  and  who  gives  us  the  experience  of  the  fourth state <i>Turiya</i>. </p>
<p>Vasudeva  Kriya  can  be  practised  at  any  place  and  time,  and  there  is  no  time  or  place restriction to think of the Lord. Over  months  of  practise,  our  breathing  pattern  changes,  we  start  radiating  peace.  When  we  are  at  peace,  our  family  members  are  at peace. When our family members are at  peace,  our  community  is  at  peace.  When  our community  is  at peace,  our country  is  at peace. When the country is at peace, the  world  is  at  peace.  The  peace  in  the  world  must dawn in our hearts first. </p>
<p>Vasudeva  Kriya  makes  our  life  divine  and  makes  us  think  of  the  Lord  all  the  time.  This is an attempt to experience the <i>Turiya </i> and  think  of  the  Lord  in  the  last  minute  of  our  life.  If  we  can  think  of  the  Lord  in  the last moment of the life and depart the  body, there is no more rebirth and one gets  liberated  from  the  process  of  coming  and  going into one body or the other. Vasudeva  Kriya Yoga is aimed at directly awakening  the  highest  human  potential.  Vasudeva  Kriya Yoga not only helps those who believe  in the Supreme, but non believers will also  derive  some  benefits.  This  is  to  be  learnt  under a teacher.</p>
</section>
<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
	</section>
</body>
</html>
