<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Prophet</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-000c.1">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">ABOUT THE AUTHOR</h1>
		<p>World-Celebrated poet, artist and philosopher Kahlil Gibran was born in the town of Bsharri in the north of modernday Lebanon on July 6, 1883. In 1895 he emigrated to the United States with his mother, brother and two sisters. It was there that Gibran discovered his artistic talents and wrote poems and essays and drew and painted. He wrote both in English and in Arabic. In the Arab world, Gibran is regarded as a literary and political rebel. His romantic style, breaking away from the classical school, is at the heart of modern Arabic literature. In the 1960s Gibran’s works influenced American popular culture. His most famous work, <em>THE PROPHET</em>, has been a bestseller from the 1920s. He wrote mostly in English and managed to revolutionise the language of poetry in the 1920s and 1930s, thus opening the doors to a new kind of creativity. He also illustrated a number of his books with his own drawings.</p>
		<p>In the 1960s <em>The Prophet </em>became a counterculture guide and in the 1980s the message of spiritualism overcoming material success was adopted by Yuppies. He offered a dogma-free universal spiritualism as opposed to orthodox religion. Gibran’s major works include The <em>Madman, The Wanderer, Jesus The Son of Man, Tears and Laughter, The Broken Wings and Thoughts and Meditations</em>. Gibran died in New York on April 10, 1931.</p>
		<p><em>The Prophet,</em> published in 1923, a partly autobiographical book of 26 poetic essays, has been translated into over 40 languages. Its simplicity and wisdom has inspired generations of readers. It was considered a literary phenomenon the world over.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
