<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Prophet</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-003">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Marriage</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">T</span>hen Almitra spoke again and said, And what of Marriage, master?</p>
		<p>And he answered saying:</p>
		<p>You were born together, and together you shall be for evermore.</p>
		<p>You shall be together when the white wings of death scatter your days.</p>
		<p>Aye, you shall be together even in the silent memory of God.</p>
		<p>But let there be spaces in your togetherness. And let the winds of the heavens dance between you.</p>
		<p>Love one another, but make not a bond of love:</p>
		<p>Let it rather be a moving sea between the shores of your souls.</p> 
		<p>Fill each other’s cup but drink not from one cup.</p>
		<p>Give one another of your bread but eat not from the same loaf.</p>
		<p>Sing and dance together and be joyous, but let each one of you be alone, Even as the strings of a lute are alone though they quiver with the same music.</p>
		<p>Give your hearts, but not into each other’s keeping.</p>
		<p>For only the hand of Life can contain your hearts.</p>
		<p>And stand together yet not too near together:</p> 
		<p>For the pillars of the temple stand apart,</p> 
		<p>And the oak tree and the cypress grow not in each other’s shadow.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
	</section>
</body>
</html>
