<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Prophet</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-008">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Joy and Sorrow</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">T</span>hen a woman said, Speak to us of Joy and Sorrow.</p>
		<p>And he answered:</p>
		<p>Your joy is your sorrow unmasked.</p> 
		<p>And the selfsame well from which your laughter rises was oftentimes filled with your tears.</p>
		<p>And how else can it be?</p>
		<p>The deeper that sorrow carves into your being, the more joy you can contain.</p>
		<p>Is not the cup that holds your wine the very cup that was burned in the potter’s oven?</p>
		<p>And is not the lute that soothes your spirit the very wood that was hollowed with knives?</p>
		<p>When you are joyous, look deep into your heart and you shall find it is only that which has given you sorrow that is giving you joy.</p>
		<p>When you are sorrowful, look again in your heart, and you shall see that in truth you are weeping for that which has been your delight.</p>
		<p>Some of you say, “Joy is greater than sorrow,” and others say, “Nay, sorrow is the greater.”</p>
		<p>But I say unto you, they are inseparable.</p>
		<p>Together they come, and when one sits alone with you at your board, remember that the other is asleep upon your bed.</p>
		<p>Verily you are suspended like scales between your sorrow and your joy.</p>
		<p>Only when you are empty are you at stand still and balanced.</p>
		<p>When the treasure-keeper lifts you to weigh his gold and his silver, needs must your joy or your sorrow rise or fall.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
	</section>
</body>
</html>
