<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Prophet</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-013">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Laws</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">T</span>hen a lawyer said, But what of our Laws, master?</p>
		<p>And he answered:</p>
		<p>You delight in laying down laws,</p>
		<p>Yet you delight more in breaking them.</p>
		<p>Like children playing by the ocean who build sandtowers with constancy and then destroy them with laughter.</p>
		<p>But while you build your sand-towers the ocean brings more sand to the shore, And when you destroy them the ocean laughs with you.</p>
		<p>Verily the ocean laughs always with the innocent.</p>
		<p>But what of those to whom life is not an ocean, and man-made laws are not sand-towers,</p>
		<p>But to whom life is a rock, and the law a chisel with which they would carve it in their own likeness?</p>
		<p>What of the cripple who hates dancers?</p>
		<p>What of the ox who loves his yoke and deems the elk and deer of the forest stray and vagrant things?</p>
		<p>What of the old serpent who cannot shed his skin, and calls all others naked and shameless?</p>
		<p>And of him who comes early to the wedding feast, and when over-fed and tired goes his way saying that all feasts are violation and all feasters law-breakers?</p>
		<p>What shall I say of these save that they too stand in the sunlight, but with their backs to the sun?</p>
		<p>They see only their shadows, and their shadows are their laws.</p>
		<p>And what is the sun to them but a caster of shadows?</p>
		<p>And what is it to acknowledge the laws but to stoop down and trace their shadows upon the earth?</p>
		<p>But you who walk facing the sun, what images drawn on the earth can hold you?</p>
		<p>You who travel with the wind, what weather vane shall direct your course?</p>
		<p>What man’s law shall bind you if you break your yoke but upon no man’s prison door?</p>
		<p>What laws shall you fear if you dance but stumble against no man’s iron chains?</p>
		<p>And who is he that shall bring you to judgment if you tear off your garment yet leave it in no man’s path?</p>
		<p>People of Orphalese, you can muffle the drum, and you can loosen the strings of the lyre, but who shall command the skylark not to sing?</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
	</section>
</body>
</html>
