<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Prophet</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<section class="level1 numbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-019">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title">Friendship</h1>
		<p><span class="bigletter">A</span>nd a youth said, Speak to us of Friendship.</p>
		<p>And he answered, saying: Your friend is your needs answered.</p>
		<p>He is your field which you sow with love and reap with thanks giving.</p>
		<p>And he is your board and your fireside. For you come to him with your hunger, and you seek him for peace.</p>
		<p>When your friend speaks his mind you fear not the “nay” in your own mind, nor do you with hold the “aye.”</p>
		<p>And when he is silent your heart ceases not to listen to his heart;</p>
		<p>For without words, in friendship, all thoughts, all desires, all expectations are born and shared, with joy that is unclaimed.</p>
		<p>when you part from your friend, you grieve not;</p>
		<p>For that which you love most in him may be clearer in his absence, as the mountain to the climber is clearer from the plain.</p>
		<p>And let there be no purpose in friendship save the deepening of the spirit.</p>
		<p>For love that seeks aught but the disclosure of its own mystery is not love but a net cast forth: and only the unprofitable is caught.</p>
		<p>And let your best be for your friend.</p>
		<p>If he must know the ebb of your tide, let him know its flood also.</p>
		<p>For what is your friend that you should seek him with hours to kill?</p>
		<p>Seek him always with hours to live.For it is his to fill your need, but not your emptiness.</p>
		<p>And in the sweetness of friendship let there be laughter, and sharing of pleasures.</p>
		<p>For in the dew of little things the heart finds its morning and is refreshed.</p>
		<p class="vertical-delimiter" />
	</section>
</body>
</html>
